
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Main Menu
European Society for Vascular Surgery

    Submit

    Register

    Articles
    Publish
    Multimedia
    About
    Contact
    SubscribeDirect Link

Advanced search
Full length articleVolume 53, Issue 1p4-52January 2017Open Archive
Editor's Choice – Management of Descending Thoracic Aorta Diseases
Clinical Practice Guidelines of the European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS)
V. Riambaua ∙ D. Böcklera ∙ J. Brunkwalla ∙ … ∙ J.-B. Ricco ∙ H. Rousseau ∙ J. Schmidli … Show more
Cover Image - European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Volume 53, Issue 1

Download PDF
Cite

    Set Alert
    Get Rights
    Reprints

Previous article
Next article
Keywords

    Clinical practice
    Descending thoracic aorta
    Descending thoracic aortic management
    Guideline
    Recommendations
    Thoracic aorta abnormalities
    Thoracic aorta diseases
    Thoracic aorta disorders
    Thoraco-abdominal aorta

Abbreviations and acronyms

AAA
    Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
AAS
    Acute Aortic Syndromes
AAST
    American Association for Surgery of Trauma
AD
    Aortic Dissection
ATBAD
    Acute Type B Aortic Dissection
CA
    Coeliac Artery
CAD
    Coronary Artery Disease
CCA
    Common Carotid Artery
COPD
    Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CSF
    Cerebrospinal Fluid
CT
    Computed Tomography
CTA
    Computed Tomographic Angiography
CTBAD
    Chronic Type B Aortic Dissection
DSA
    Digital Subtraction Angiography
DTA
    Descending Thoracic Aorta
DTAA
    Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm
ECG
    Electrocardiogram
EDS
    Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
EJVES
    European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery
ESR
    Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate
ESVS
    European Society for Vascular Surgery
FL
    False Lumen
GCA
    Giant Cells Arteritis
IMH
    Intramural Haematoma
IRAD
    International Registry of Aortic Dissection
IVUS
    Intravascular Ultrasonography
LDS
    Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
LHB
    Left Heart Bypass
LSA
    Left Subclavian Artery
MAP
    Mean Arterial Pressure
MEP
    Motor Evoked Potentials
MFS
    Marfan Syndrome
MRA
    Magnetic Resonance Angiography
MRI
    Magnetic Resonance Imaging
NSF
    Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis
OR
    Open Repair
PAU
    Penetrating Aortic Ulcer
PET
    Positron Emission Tomography
PMR
    Polymyalgia Rheumatica
RCT
    Randomized Clinical Trial
SCI
    Spinal Cord Ischaemia
SMA
    Superior Mesenteric Artery
SSEP
    Somatosensory Evoked Potentials
TA
    Takayasu Arteritis
TAAA
    Thoraco-Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
TAI
    Thoracic Aortic Injury
TBAD
    Type B Aortic Dissection
TEVAR
    Thoracic Endovascular Repair
TL
    True Lumen
TOE
    Transoesophageal Echocardiography
TS
    Turner Syndrome
TTE
    Transthoracic Echocardiography
WC
    Writing Committee

1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose
The European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS) appointed the Descending Thoracic Aorta (DTA) Writing Committee (WC) to produce the current clinical practice guidelines document for surgeons and other physicians who are involved in the overall care of patients with DTA disorders. The goal of these guidelines is to summarize and evaluate all current available evidence to assist physicians in selecting the best management strategies for all DTA pathologies. However, each respective physician must make the ultimate decision regarding the particular care of an individual patient.
The present guidelines document aims to improve decision making and decrease variability in the vascular surgical care of patients presenting with pathology of the DTA. Unfortunately, robust evidence from prospective and randomized studies is not available for management of most DTA diseases. Consequently, the recommendations in these guidelines are entirely based on level B and C evidence. Nevertheless, when managing DTA pathology, it is clinically helpful to have access to the most recent and best available clinical and experimental knowledge to determine the current standard of care.
The DTA WC intentionally agreed to exclude pathology of the ascending aorta and aortic arch from the current document to avoid potential inter-specialty conflict. The cost analysis of different treatments was also excluded because of differences in financial management and differing health systems across Europe. Primarily infectious or mycotic disease processes were also considered outside of the scope of this document because of their low incidence and poor outcomes.
All disorders originating in the DTA from the left subclavian artery (LSA) origin to the diaphragm were considered for these guidelines. Pathology involving the thoraco-abdominal segment of the aorta was also included.
1.2 Methodology
The DTA WC was formed by members of the ESVS from different European countries, various academic and private hospitals, and by both vascular surgeons and endovascular specialists, to maximize the applicability of the final guidelines document. The DTA Guidelines Committee met in November 2011 for the first time to discuss the purpose, contents, methods, and timeline of the following recommendations.
The DTA WC performed a systematic English literature search in the MEDLINE, EMBASE, and COCHRANE Library databases for each of the different topics that are discussed and reviewed. The latest literature search was performed in December 2015. With regard to evidence gathered, the following eligibility criteria were applied:
•
Only peer reviewed published literature was considered
•
Published abstracts or congress proceedings were excluded
•
Randomized clinical trials (RCT) as well as meta-analyses and systematic reviews were assessed with priority
•
Non-randomized clinical trials and non-controlled studies were included
•
Well conducted observational studies (cohort and case control studies) were included
•
Previous guidelines, position papers, and published consensus documents were included as part of the review process when new evidence was absent
•
We minimized the use of reports from a single medical device or from pharmaceutical companies in order to reduce the risk of bias across studies.
A grading system was adopted based on the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines methodology.1 The level of evidence classification provides information about the study characteristics supporting the recommendation and expert consensus, according to the categories shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Levels of evidence.1

    Open table in a new tab

The recommendation grade indicates the strength of a recommendation. Definitions of the classes of recommendation are shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Grades of strength of recommendations according to the ESC grading system.1

    Open table in a new tab

For each recommendation, two members of the WC assessed the strength of a recommendation and the quality of supporting evidence independently. A full master copy of the manuscript with all recommendations was electronically circulated and approved by all WC members. Recommendations that required consensus were discussed and voted on by email among all members of the WC.
This system permits strong recommendations, supported by low or very low quality evidence from downgraded RCTs or observational studies, only when a general consensus is achieved among the WC members and reviewers.
Two members of the WC prepared each part of the guidelines document. An internal review process was performed before the manuscript was sent to independent external reviewers. External reviewers made critical suggestions, comments, and corrections on all preliminary versions of this guideline. In addition, each member participated in the consensus process concerning conflicting recommendations. The final document was reviewed and approved by the ESVS Guidelines Committee and submitted to the European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery (EJVES). Further updated guidelines documents on DTA management will be provided periodically by the ESVS when new evidence and/or new clinical practice arise in this field.
To optimize the implementation of the current document, the length of the guideline has been kept as short as possible to facilitate access to guideline information. Following this decision, the “References” list has been limited to the most relevant references related to these guidelines. Nevertheless, an Appendix of recommended additional references, also reviewed by the WC, has been added for further information for readers. This clinical guidelines document was constructed as a guide, not a document of rules, allowing for flexibility with various patient presentations. The resulting clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations for the clinical care of patients with thoracic aortic diseases including pre-, peri-, and post-operative care.
Conflicts of interest of each WC member were collected prior to the writing process. These conflicts were assessed and accepted by each member of the WC and are reported on the ESVS website. In addition, the WC agreed that all intellectual work should be expressed without any interference beyond the honesty and professionalism of all members and assistants during the writing process.
2 General Aspects
2.1 The normal descending thoracic aorta
The DTA originates from the isthmus, the region of the thoracic aorta between the origin of the LSA and the ductus arteriosus. The descending thoracic aorta runs in a left para-spinal location until its distal segment, where it passes anteriorly through the diaphragmatic aortic hiatus and inferiorly into the abdomen. Important aortic side branches originating from the descending thoracic aorta include the intercostal arteries, spinal arteries, and bronchial arteries. The normal diameter of the mid-descending aorta ranges from 24 to 29 mm in men and 24 to 26 mm in women, whereas the normal diameter at the level of the diaphragm is 24 to 27 mm in men and 23 to 24 mm in women. Aortic diameter is influenced by age and body mass index.2,3
The aortic wall is composed of three layers: the intima, media, and adventitia. The intima, the innermost layer, consists of an endothelial monolayer and an internal elastic lamina. Because it is in direct contact with blood, the function of the intima is to prevent thrombosis and atherosclerosis. Its anti-thrombotic and anti-atheroscle-rotic function can be reduced by risk factors, such as smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, and direct trauma, each making patients more prone to aortic disease.
The media consists of concentric layers of elastin, collagen, and smooth muscle cells. These components are responsible for aortic wall elasticity, which accommodates the changes in stroke volume during the cardiac cycle, converts pulsatile inflow into a smoother outflow (Windkessel function), and maintains the integrity of the aortic wall. Congenital or hereditary disorders (e.g. bicuspid aortic valve, Marfan syndrome [MFS], Ehlers-Danlos syndrome [EDS]), risk factors (hypertension, atherosclerosis, and trauma) all influence aortic wall function. These conditions can stiffen the aortic wall, decreasing its ability to accommodate the stroke volume, resulting in systemic hypertension, or weakening of the aortic wall, leading to dilatation or dissection.
The adventitia is the outermost layer of the aortic wall and is composed mainly of collagen fibres, external elastic lamina, and small vessels (the vasa vasorum), which provide the blood supply to the aortic wall and surrounding nerves.
2.2 Epidemiology of descending thoracic aortic disease
DTA diseases consist of a broad spectrum of degenerative, structural, acquired, genetic, and traumatic disorders. The true incidence of descending thoracic aortic pathology remains unclear. Epidemiological studies are sparse and it is likely that many DTA related deaths are attributed to other cardiovascular diseases, such as cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, or abdominal aneurysm rupture. Therefore, the overall incidence of DTA disease is likely to be underestimated.
The pathophysiology of thoracic aortic diseases is believed to be multifactorial, resulting both from genetic susceptibility and environmental exposure. Therefore, the incidence of the different thoracic aortic diseases can vary significantly among different population groups.
Acute aortic syndromes (AAS) consist of three interrelated diseases: aortic dissection, penetrating aortic ulcer (PAU), and intramural haematoma (IMH). Type B aortic dissection (TBAD) most commonly affects male patients and has an incidence between 2.9 and 4.0 per 100,000 person-years.4 The incidence of TBAD seems to be increasing. A recent prospective analysis of 30,412 middle aged men and women from Malmö, Sweden with a 20 year follow up reported an incidence of acute aortic dissection of 15 per 100,000 patient years.5 This increase is probably caused by the increasing age of the population and improving diagnostic modalities. The exact incidence remains unknown, but PAU has been diagnosed with increasing frequency because of the widespread use of advanced cross sectional imaging techniques. In symptomatic patients suspected of AAS, the prevalence of PAU is 2.3–7.6% and the lesion is localised in the DTA in 90% of patients.6 IMH may be related to PAU, accounting for 5–20% of patients with AAS and more commonly involving the DTA (60%) than the ascending aorta.7
Trauma is the leading cause of death during the first four decades of life, accounting for more than 250,000 deaths every year in the European Union alone.8 Blunt aortic injury is the second leading cause of death in these patients, and although it occurs in less than 1% of all motor vehicle accidents, it accounts for 16% of all traumatic deaths.9
Concerning ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm (DTAA), a Swedish population study reported an incidence of 5 per 100,000 person-years. The mean age of patients in this cohort was 70 years for men and 72 years for women.10
Aneurysmal dilatation of the DTA is a degenerative disease with an estimated incidence of 6–10.4 per 100,000 person-years. The incidence seems to be increasing with ageing of the general population and continually improving diagnostic modalities.11
Aortitis is a relatively uncommon disorder with a broad spectrum of clinical features. The most common autoimmune disorders affecting the DTA are Takayasu's arteritis (TA), giant cell arteritis (GCA), and Behçet's disease. The best estimates of the incidence of TA suggest that two or three cases occur each year per million people.12 There is a 9:1 female to male predominance. Although the disease has a worldwide distribution, it appears to occur more frequently in Asian women.
GCA is the most common type of vasculitis observed in patients older than 50 years. Predominantly observed in populations of Scandinavian descent, it has a reported prevalence that varies between 1 and 30 per 100,000 people.13 The male to female ratio is around 2.5 to 1 and is highly dependent on geographic and genetic parameters.14
Behçet's disease has been observed most commonly along the classic Silk Route, with a peak prevalence in Turkey of 80–370 per 100,000 people, compared with 1–3 per million people in the Western world. Presentation is typically in the third to fifth decade of life, and both genders are affected equally.15
Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital cardiovascular defect, most commonly occurring at the level of the isthmus and accounts for 5–8% of all congenital heart defects. The overall incidence ranges between 20 and 60 per 100,000 person-years, with a slight male predominance. Patients with Turner syndrome (TS) are more commonly affected.16
2.3 Diagnostic methods in descending thoracic aortic disease
2.3.1 Medical history and physical examination
A comprehensive medical and family history, assessment of symptoms, and careful physical examination including blood pressure measurement and electrocardiography (ECG), are required in all patients suspected of thoracic aortic disease. Patients should be examined for suspicious clinical signs such as aortic regurgitation, cardiac murmur, pericardial rub, signs of tamponade, and an expansile abdominal aorta. The diagnosis of thoracic aortic disease is based on imaging and the choice of imaging modality should be based on the patient's condition and the availability of different imaging modalities.17
2.3.2 Plain radiography
Postero-anterior and lateral chest radiographs can be used to diagnose calcification within atheromatous lesions, left pleural effusions, aortic enlargement, and anomalous aortic contours in asymptomatic or symptomatic patients. A left pleural effusion can indicate a frank rupture, an exudate from inflammation of the adventitia in AAS, or, less commonly, inflammatory aortic disease. The International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) showed that 21% of patients with a type B aortic dissection presented with a normal chest X-ray, and a meta-analysis demonstrated a sensitivity for an abnormal chest X-ray of 90% for TBAD.18 Although chest X-rays might be used in very low risk patients to exclude thoracic aortic diseases, these potentially lethal diseases require a conclusive diagnosis with the use of multiplanar imaging techniques such as computed tomographic angiography (CTA).
Figure undfig1
2.3.3 Transthoracic echocardiography
The use of TTE to assess the DTA is limited by structures in the thorax that weaken or distort the ultrasound signal and compromise image quality. Via a suprasternal, subcostal, or parasternal view, small parts of the DTA can be visualized, while in the case of a pleural effusion, the back of the patient can be used for transthoracic imaging.19 The major advantage of TTE is that it is non-invasive and can be used to visualize the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and supra-aortic vessels. In addition, the abdominal aorta can be visualized to check for abdominal extension of aortic dissection (AD). During TTE, all planes should be used to assess the extent of aortic disease and to exclude additional aortic or cardiac involvement. Because of its non-invasive nature and wide availability, TTE is increasingly used in the emergency department of community hospitals to screen patients suspected of having one or other acute aortic syndrome, such as type A dissection. However, the value of TTE in the diagnosis of DTA pathology remains limited. In cases of examination limitations or inconclusive diagnosis, the use of additional imaging modalities is recommended.19 There are currently no specific studies to validate the usefulness of TTE for diagnosis of DTA pathology.
2.3.4 Transoesophageal echocardiography
TOE can visualize the DTA from the LSA to the coeliac artery (CA). This diagnostic test is generally used as a second line imaging modality and is useful to differentiate between AD, IMH, and PAU. With a reported sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 95%, TOE is an accurate diagnostic tool for aortic disease, providing functional information in both the pre- and intra-operative settings.19 The semi-invasive nature of TOE has rare procedure related risks, but it can cause patient discomfort, requires sedation, and is contraindicated in the presence of oesophageal pathologies. In the majority of cases, computed tomographic angiography (CTA) scanning is performed as the first imaging modality, providing all required information. TOE may be used in specific circumstances as a second line option.
2.3.5 Computed tomographic angiography
CTA offers a detailed visualisation of the entire aorta and its surrounding structures. It can distinguish different aortic pathologies and is quick and widely available. Over the last two decades, CTA has become more sophisticated and is more readily available, with an increase in the number of scanners, the use of retrospective and prospective ECG-gated techniques, and through advances in post-processing software. These advances have resulted in motion free images with better resolution, reduced scanning times, and better visualisation.20
Current CTA scanners have a sensitivity of up to 100% and a specificity of 98–99%, with slight variations between different DTA pathologies.21 Imaging should include a non-contrast study, followed by an early and late phase contrast study and should examine the part of the body between the thoracic inlet and the common femoral arteries. This range provides complete information with three dimensional reconstruction. In addition, dynamic images can further assist in surgical planning or endovascular interventions. Consequently, CTA has replaced digital subtraction aortography as the “gold standard” for aortic imaging. Important disadvantages of CTA include the use of nephrotoxic contrast agents and the exposure of patients to ionizing radiation. In patients at increased risk of contrast induced nephropathy, circulating volume expansion with either isotonic sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate solutions is recommended.22
Figure undfig2
2.3.6 Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI has an excellent diagnostic capability that is comparable with CTA and TOE and can be used for both pre-operative planning and follow up.23 A major advantage of MRI is that it offers multiplanar evaluation with good differentiation between different soft tissues. Moreover, MRI can provide additional dynamic imaging regarding entry tear flow or arterial vessel involvement.23 Although contrast is not usually required, the use of gadolinium enhances the quality of MRI. MRI can be used to visualize the aortic wall in detail and is, therefore, more commonly used in patients with aortic wall pathologies such as IMH or aortitis. Furthermore, MRI does not require ionizing radiation and offers an alternative for patients with renal insufficiency in some circumstances.
Important disadvantages of MRI include its limited availability and longer scanning times, which makes it less suitable for critically ill or unstable patients. In addition, the ability of MRI to detect calcification is decreased (compared with CTA), and artefacts from respiration or metallic implants reduce image quality. Post-gadolinium nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is a rare, but devastating, side-effect in patients with impaired renal function. Using alternative imaging modalities or using the lowest possible amount of gadolinium may prevent NSF.24
2.3.7 Positron emission tomography
PET is a nuclear imaging modality that is based on the detection of increased metabolic activity in inflammatory cells, resulting in increased uptake of a gammagraphic tracer, most commonly fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F] FDG). PET can be used for the diagnosis of aortitis and in the assessment of the extent and activity of any inflammatory disease. The diagnostic value of FDG-PET differs among the various inflammatory aortic diseases with a reported sensitivity ranging between 83% and 100% and specificity between 77% and 100%.25 Development of PET in combination with computed tomography (CT) scanners has made it possible to combine functional and anatomic imaging, thereby making it possible for PET findings to be correlated with adjacent anatomical features. Although the availability of PET and PET/CT is limited, this modality may be used for diagnosis and follow up of aortitis.26 Increased patient radiation exposure is a major disadvantage of PET/CT (when compared with PET or CT examinations alone), as the effective radiation dose is a combination of the dose from both scans.27
2.3.8 Intra-vascular ultrasonography
IVUS permits 360° visualisation of the aortic wall. It can be very helpful in confirming intimal defects when CTA and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) are inconclusive in the diagnosis of aortic injuries. IVUS is an operator and experience-dependent invasive procedure, and a complete evaluation of the aorta using IVUS can be time consuming. In some centres, IVUS is routinely used as an adjuvant imaging technique during endovascular repair (see also Section 3.1.4.1). Table 3 compares different imaging diagnostic tests for DTA according to their features and performance.
Characteristics	TTE	TOE	CTA	MRI	PET	IVUS
Non-invasiveness	+++	++	−	+	−	−
Ease of use	+++	++	+++	++	++	+
Availability	+++	++	+++	++	+	+
Portability/bedside use	+++	+++	−	−	−	+/−
Interventional guidance use	+	+++	−	−	−	+++
Safe for serial examinations	+++	++	++	+++	++	−
Wall contour assessment	+	+++	+++	++	++	++
Supra-aortic vessel status evaluation	++	+	+++	+++	++	++
Aortic valve status evaluation	+++	+++	−	−	−	−
Pericardial effusion detection	+++	+++	+++	+++	++	−
Inflammation/Infection detection	−	+	++	++	+++	+
Table 3
Comparison of different imaging modalities for DTA diagnosis.17
Number of signs (+ or −) represents the estimated potential value.
TTE = transthoracic echocardiography; TOE = transoesophageal echocardiography; CTA = computed tomographic angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomography; IVUS = intra-vascular ultrasonography.

    Open table in a new tab

2.4 Neurological complications: prevention and management
The most feared and devastating complications associated with management of DTA disease are spinal cord ischaemia (SCI), resulting in paraparesis or paraplegia, and cerebral embolism, resulting in stroke.28 SCI can develop immediately after surgery or with a delayed presentation. Although SCI rates as high as 20% have been reported, the incidence probably ranges between 2% and 6%.29 The incidence of paraplegia is related to the duration and degree of spinal ischaemia resulting from an abrupt cessation of blood flow to the spinal cord and from a reperfusion injury mediated by biochemical mediators.30 The presence of stroke after DTA surgery seems to be similar to aortic arch repair and often has an embolic aetiology, with an incidence up to 8% in elective cases or higher in the emergency setting.31 Classic predictors for these complications are diverse and include increasing patient age, previous carotid artery disease, aortic cross-clamp time, the extent of the aortic resection, aortic rupture, concurrent aneurysm disease of ascending aorta and/or aortic arch, emergency surgery, the use and duration of hypothermic arrest, peri-operative hypotension, and pre-operative renal dysfunction.28,31
Several methods for spinal cord and brain protection have been used to reduce the incidence of neurological complications. These methods are described in the following sections.
2.4.1 Spinal cord function monitoring
During thoracic aortic surgery, the function of the spinal cord can be directly monitored with use of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) or motor evoked potentials (MEP).30 SSEP monitoring records stimulation of the posterior tibial nerve by electrodes placed on the scalp, and this technique is sensitive for detecting spinal cord ischaemia. Clinical studies have shown that SSEP can be used both to identify dominant intercostal arteries and to determine if these vessels require re-implantation.32 However, SSEP does not record motor function because perfusion of the anterior corticospinal tract is not assessed. Therefore, SSEP can be associated with delayed detection of ischaemia, thereby reducing its specificity.30 MEP, on the other hand, stimulates the corticospinal tract transcranially or via the spinal cord directly. This technique has demonstrated increased sensitivity in predicting SCI compared with SSEP.33,34 Major disadvantages of MEP are the influence of anaesthetic agents on the potential amplitude and the resistance of axonal conduction to ischaemia, which makes the response of MEP to ischaemia generally slow.33 Institutional experience and availability of these techniques should determine their use.
Figure undfig3
2.4.2 Prevention of spinal cord ischaemia in open repair
Surgical techniques have been developed over the years to prevent SCI. Techniques like the Crawford inlay, single clamp repair, sequential aortic clamping, and others have been introduced with varying results. As revascularisation of all of the intercostal arteries is not feasible, the identification of important vessels is relevant for success.35 Revascularisation of the artery of Adamkiewicz and the intercostal arteries of T11/T12 has been reported, although not widely implemented. Pre-operative angiography has been used to identify the most important vessels, but as angiography itself can induce SCI (resulting from embolisation), other modalities such as magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and CTA have become more popular.36
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure increases with aortic cross-clamping, and will eventually exceed the venous pressure, compromising venous outflow, leading to spinal cord malperfusion and secondary SCI. Randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses have shown that CSF drainage has a role in the prevention of paraplegia and paraparesis, with a risk reduction up to 75% (OR 0.48, 95% CI 0.25–0.92), but additional studies are recommended.29,37
During aortic cross-clamping, prophylactic CSF drainage aims to maintain CSF pressure at 10 mm Hg intra-operatively and for 48–72 hours after completion of the aneurysm repair. In fact, delayed and late onset of neurological deficit are also described and potentially worsened by haemodynamic instability.35
Recent studies have shown that CSF drainage combined with intrathecal papaverine solution can be beneficial.38 Potential complications related to CSF drainage occur in fewer than 5% of cases, and include meningitis, epidural haematoma, subdural haematoma, and CSF leakage syndrome.37–39
The use of left heart bypass (LHB) prevents heart failure and maintains distal aortic perfusion and CSF pressures as close to baseline as possible, and thereby reduces the risk of post-operative paraplegia and paraparesis in patients undergoing repair of type I and type II thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysm (TAAA)40 (see also Section 3.4.). Extra-corporeal circulation allows sequential aortic clamping, maintaining retrograde perfusion of all of the vital organs and the spinal cord. These techniques have been shown to be beneficial in patients with TAAA, reducing the incidence of SCI by perfusion of the distal aorta from 11.2% to 4.5%.40 Another important advantage of circulatory bypass is that it permits the induction of systemic hypothermia for additional neurological protection. Distal perfusion is often combined with CSF drainage or hypothermia, and has proven beneficial in reducing the incidence of SCI.35,38,41 Induced systemic hypothermia by cardiopulmonary bypass and intermittent cardiac arrest might be an effective method to reduce the risk of SCI.41 Moderate systemic hypothermia to temperatures of 32 °C improves outcome without significant risks for the patient.41,42 However, the systemic anticoagulation required in these patients increases the risk of bleeding, and, in such conditions, CSF drainage and intrathecal manoeuvres can be dangerous.39,41,42 During the post-operative period, the maintenance of mean arterial pressure (MAP) between 80 and 100 mm Hg has been suggested by high volume centers.35
After a period of ischaemia caused by cross-clamping, reperfusion injury can occur. Biochemical mediators, especially iron-related free radicals, induce cellular damage. Free radical scavengers have been studied in the prevention of ischaemia, which suggests that numerous agents may protect the spinal cord from transient ischaemia.43
Other pharmacological agents such as glucocorticosteroids may be beneficial in the prevention of SCI, although high quality evidence is lacking.44 Other options include intrathecal hypothermia, but this requires an open laminectomy or closed epidural infusion system. These techniques are not fully applicable in current clinical practice (see also Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 for specific details).
Figure undfig4
2.4.3 Prevention of spinal cord ischaemia in thoracic endovascular repair
TEVAR has been associated with a reduced incidence of neurological complications compared with open DTAA repair, but the risk of paraplegia or paraparesis ranges from 2.5% up to 8% and remains a concern.44–46 Prior abdominal aorta aneurysm (AAA) repair, prolonged hypotension, severe atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta, occlusion of the left subclavian artery and/or hypogastric arteries, and extensive coverage of the thoracic aorta by the endograft are all associated with an increased incidence of SCI.44–49 Therefore, spinal cord protection (including CSF drainage) should be considered in patients with previous AAA repair or in patients who require extensive aortic repairs, as the benefit of CSF drainage is greatest in patients at the highest risk for spinal cord injury.45–47
Figure undfig5
2.4.4 Prevention of stroke
Intra-operative embolism is the main cause of stroke in patients undergoing surgical repair of the DTA, emphasizing the importance of precautions during the operative period.
Debris from aortic atheroma/thrombus can result in an embolic ischaemic stroke and the release of debris should be prevented during surgery. Reducing manipulation of the DTA to a strict minimum40 and TOE mapping of the sites of cannulation are techniques that can minimize the risk of embolisation.19 When clamping is neither possible nor recommended, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest must be instituted.42 In patients with atrial fibrillation, the use of arteriovenous femoro-femoral bypass or deep hypothermic arrest and the avoidance of cannulation of the left atrium with possible manipulation of thrombus may be a useful alternative.40,42
During endovascular repair, guidewires within the aortic arch have the potential to mobilize debris and guidewire manipulation should be reduced to the minimum. According to a recent retrospective, multicentre analysis of selective LSA revascularisation in the treatment of multiple DTA pathologies,48 coverage of the LSA in patients treated with TEVAR was associated with a higher incidence of stroke and paraplegia. Therefore, LSA revascularisation should be considered in the elective setting.44–46,49,50 In the acute setting, revascularisation should be performed based on the patient's anatomy (left mammary to coronary bypass, or dominant cerebral blood supply from the left vertebral artery) during emergency repair of the DTA (see also Sections 3.1 and 3.3).
Figure undfig6
3 Specific Thoracic Aortic Disorders
3.1 Acute thoracic aortic syndrome
AAS covers a heterogeneous group of patients with similar anatomic and clinical characteristics. This group includes AD, IMH, and PAU.51 Traumatic aortic transection and ruptured DTAA also may be included. The most common symptom is chest pain. Histopathologically, all of these entities involve disruption of the media of the aorta, with bleeding between the layers of the aorta or transmurally in the case of rupture. Each condition can progress to another one of the group and each pathology may coexist in the same patient.
3.1.1 Acute type B aortic dissection
3.1.1.1 Definition, risk factors, and clinical presentation
Acute type B aortic dissection (ATBAD) is the result of a tear in the intimal arterial layer, which allows blood to propagate within the medial layer. This creates a flap, which divides the aorta into a true lumen (TL), and a false lumen (FL). The most common site for the proximal intimal tear in ATBAD is located just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. In 90% of cases, ATBAD has a secondary tear that allows blood to re-enter the TL at what is known as the re-entry site.51,52
The Stanford and DeBakey classifications are most commonly used to describe ATBAD (Fig. 1). DeBakey classified AD, based on the origin of the intimal tear and the extent of the dissection. The Stanford classification is based on the involvement of the ascending aorta.53 A type A dissection is defined by involvement of the ascending aorta and type B by the absence of ascending aortic involvement. There is no consensus about the classification of arch AD without involvement of the ascending aorta.54 Type B dissections originate distal to the ostium of the left subclavian artery. This classification is comparable with a DeBakey type III (including type IIIb), in which the dissection extends into the abdominal aorta. ATBAD accounts for 30–40% of all dissections.52,54–56 AD is defined as “acute dissection” within 14 days of the onset of symptoms. Thereafter, it is defined as sub-acute between 2 weeks and 3 months and chronic after 3 months (see also Section 3.2).
Figure 1 Schematic drawings of De Bakey (I, II, IIIa and IIIb) and Stanford (A and B) combined classifications for aortic dissection.
Any condition that increases intimal shear stress or decreases arterial wall strength is considered to be a risk factor. Systemic hypertension is present in almost 80% of ATBAD patients.51 Increasing age and atherosclerosis are other important risk factors,57 as are congenital bicuspid or uni-commissural aortic valves,58 cocaine abuse,59 pregnancy,60 strenuous activities, and severe emotional stress.61
Another important risk factor is a positive family history of thoracic aortic diseases. ATBAD has a prevalence of 13–22% in patients who have a first degree relative with a history of DTAA or AD.62 The “familial thoracic aorta and dissection syndrome” is related to several identified gene mutations, including fibrillin-1 (FBN1), transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFBR1), transforming growth factor-β2 (TGFRB2), α-actin 2 (ACTA 2), and myosin heavy chain 11 (MYH11), increasing insight into the genetic pathology of the disease.63,64
Structural weakness of the aortic wall is associated with multiple connective tissue disorders such as MFS, EDS, and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) (see also Section 3.7). In patients younger than 40 years of age, who present with aortic dissection, about 50% will have MFS or a related genetic disorder. This group of patients, as well as those with a family history of thoracic aortic diseases, should receive genetic counselling.62 The aortic diameter is not closely related to ATBAD, although an increased risk of ATBAD has been observed in patients with a dilated DTA.65 The mean diameter in ATBAD has been reported as 41 mm.66 Indeed, many cases of ATBAD can occur in patients with normal diameter aortas.66,67
The clinical presentation of patients presenting with ATBAD can be diverse and may mimic a wide range of other disorders. The classical presentation is acute onset excruciating chest or interscapular pain, which is present in about 80% of ATBAD patients.55,60 The main clinical signs and symptoms are reported in Table 4. The IRAD showed that hypotension (OR 23.8, 95% CI 10.31–54.94, p < .0001), absence of chest/back pain (OR 3.5, 95% CI 1.3–9.52, p = 0.01), and branch vessel involvement (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.21–6.99, p = 0.02) are predictors of in hospital mortality.60 Although most patients present with these symptoms, some may have a non-specific presentation or even no symptoms, which can delay the diagnosis.68,69 For that reason, physicians must be familiar with an atypical presentation and a low threshold for diagnostic imaging should be maintained.
Signs and symptoms	Incidence, %
Acute excruciating chest or interscapular pain	80
Chest pain	79
Back pain	64
Abdominal pain	43
Syncope	4
Pulse deficits	9
Hypotension/shock	4
Visceral ischaemia	7
Renal ischaemia	15
Limb ischaemia	9
Recurrent pain, refractory pain, or refractory hypertension	18
Spinal cord ischaemia	3
Table 4
Main clinical presentations of ATBAD.

    Open table in a new tab

The most severe ATBAD complications include aortic rupture and occlusion of arterial branches, with consequent loss of arterial perfusion. Aortic rupture is associated with a high mortality, irrespective of the type of treatment,52,70–73 whereas patients with impending rupture who have no haemodynamic complications have better outcomes.56,70
Renal and/or visceral ischaemia may be difficult to detect. Renal ischaemia can increase creatinine levels and potentially induce refractory hypertension. Treatment of renal ischaemia is important to prevent permanent renal insufficiency and refractory hypertension which is likely to result in a more rapid expansion of the affected aorta. Visceral ischaemia was the third most common cause of death (after aortic rupture and tamponade) in AD patients in the IRAD study,55 and can result from malperfusion or systemic hypotension.55,56,60 Serum lactate levels are elevated when the ischaemic injury progresses or becomes irreversible; therefore early diagnosis is essential. ATBAD patients who present with or who develop recurrent abdominal pain should undergo repeat cross sectional imaging. In this situation, there should be a low threshold for undertaking laparoscopic inspection of the peritoneal cavity.74 Gastrointestinal haemorrhage is a rare complication and every patient presenting with bleeding and abdominal pain should be suspected of having mesenteric ischaemia.75
Acute limb ischaemia may present with paralysis of one or both lower limbs. Because of the dynamic nature of the dissection membrane, the presence of palpable peripheral pulses may be misleading.76
Paraplegia/paraparesis represents a catastrophic, but rare, complication of ATBAD secondary to SCI. Other complications include refractory pain and refractory hypertension, which are both indirect signs of impending rupture and are associated with increased in hospital mortality.77
Complicated ATBAD is defined as the presence of rapid aortic expansion, aortic rupture and/or hypotension/shock, visceral, renal, or limb ischaemia, paraplegia/paraparesis, peri-aortic haematoma, recurrent or refractory pain, and refractory hypertension despite adequate medical therapy.
In hospital survival in complicated ATBAD patients treated conservatively is about 50%.55,56,60,65,70–72,78 Hypotension/shock and visceral ischaemia are considered the most important predictors of in hospital death.56,60
Figure undfig7
Complicated ATBAD patients with severe comorbidities (e.g. ischaemic heart disease, chronic pulmonary disease, or malignancy) may not benefit from invasive management and should be evaluated individually.65,70,78
ATBAD may also present without complications in almost 50% of cases. This cohort is defined as uncomplicated ATBAD.55,78 Despite the absence of complications at the time of presentation, these patients have an in hospital mortality of 3–10%.55,78 In the presence of complications (such as visceral, renal or limb ischaemia, and/or aortic rupture), mortality rises to 20% by day 2 and 25% by day 30. Like type A dissection, advanced age, rupture, shock, and malperfusion are important predictors of increased early mortality.60,79
3.1.1.2 Management
The aims of treating ATBAD are to maintain or restore perfusion of the vital organs and to prevent both progression of the dissection and aortic rupture. Therefore, it is important to make a risk assessment at an early stage to determine the merits of medical, endovascular, or surgical intervention.
3.1.1.2.1 Medical management
Medical therapy with antihypertensive agents is widely accepted to be the first line treatment in uncomplicated ATBAD patients.52,54–56,60,65,70,77–79 Medical management is based on blood pressure reduction to limit aortic wall stress and to reduce the force of left ventricular ejection.72 The goal is to reduce systolic blood pressure between 100 and 120 mm Hg and, when attainable, the heart rate below 60 beats/min.54 In ATBAD, initial medical therapy consists of β-blockers.55,79,80 In patients who do not respond to β-blockers or who do not tolerate the drug, calcium channel antagonists and/or renin-angiotensin inhibitors can be used as alternatives.80–83 β-blockers and calcium channel blockers have been associated with improved long-term survival in ATBAD patients.83 Recent data have shown that angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers have similar positive effects to atenolol in terms of growth reduction of the aortic root in children and young adults with MFS.81,82 Other alternative therapies include sodium nitroprusside, A1-adrenergic, and non-selective β blockers.84
Pain relief is also an important component of optimal medical therapy, as persisting pain may indicate progression of the dissection or impending rupture, requiring additional therapy.77
During hospitalisation, all IV medications should be converted into oral agents, and long-term blood pressure regulation with adequate surveillance is mandatory.
Figure undfig8
3.1.1.2.2 Endovascular repair
TEVAR has developed as the first line therapeutic option in patients with complicated ATBAD.85–95 The aim of endovascular repair for treating impending aortic rupture or malperfusion is to cover the primary entry tear and to reduce blood pressure within the FL.90,95 Reduction in FL perfusion can prevent extension of the dissection, which may lead to FL thrombosis, aortic remodelling, and aortic wall stabilisation.
Although there are no randomized controlled trials, there is increasing evidence that in complicated ATBAD, emergency and urgent interventions have been beneficial.55,60,77,86,87 In these settings, TEVAR has shown a substantial advantage over OR in terms of early mortality.87–89,92–94
Currently, there are three meta-analyses available that report short- and mid-term results in complicated ATBAD patients treated with TEVAR. Technical success ranged from 95% to 99%, hospital mortality ranged from 2.6% to 9.8%, and neurological complications ranged from 0.6% to 3.1%.6,96,97
A prospective, multicentre European clinical registry showed a 30 day mortality of 8%, a stroke rate of 8%, and a SCI rate of 2% in 50 ATBAD patients.98 The initial results of a single arm multicentre study for endovascular repair of complicated AD, using a composite device design (PETTICOAT technique), which includes an uncovered infra-diaphragmatic aortic stent in addition to a standard TEVAR, showed a 1 year mortality of 10%. Stroke, transient ischaemic attack, or progression of dissection occurred in 7.5%, 2.5%, and 5% of patients, respectively.99 Another study confirmed these findings with an in hospital mortality of 4%, 40%, and 33% in TEVAR, OR, and medically treated patients, respectively.87 However, there is no evidence that extended coverage of the DTA is needed to restore distal perfusion.
Among complicated ATBAD patients, those presenting with visceral malperfusion experience the poorest outcomes. Although visceral vessel patency following TEVAR is maintained in up to 97% of patients, the 30 day mortality is high (17–34%), as are aortic related complications during the chronic stage.67,89
These patients seem to benefit from aortic balloon fenestration and branch stenting.100–102 A dynamic obstruction can be managed by increasing FL outflow with fenestration of the intimal flap, while a static obstruction or ostial disruption should be treated by stenting of the malperfused branch vessel.73,100–102
TEVAR has also been advocated in the treatment of uncomplicated ATBAD, to prevent long-term aortic dilatation and rupture. IRAD reported reduced mortality at 5 years in ATBAD patients treated by TEVAR, compared with those managed medically.103 ADSORB, the only randomized control trial in patients with uncomplicated ATBAD, was not sufficiently powered for mortality at 1 year follow up. This trial did, however, show higher rates of FL thrombosis in patients randomized to TEVAR, and FL thrombosis is associated with fewer late complications and increased aortic remodelling following repair of ATBAD.104
Although TEVAR results in this setting are favourable, endovascular related complications can be devastating and may require revision with OR.105 Stroke is reported to occur in 3–10% of patients undergoing TEVAR because of manipulation of catheters in the arch and ascending aorta, and occurs more commonly in patients with severe arch atherosclerosis.44 Although rare in ATBAD patients, SCI is related to the extent of aortic coverage, history of previous aortic surgery and the presence of hypotension at initial presentation.47 Arm ischaemia, paraparesis, and paraplegia may occur from LSA or intercostal artery occlusion, which may require revascularisation.49,50 (see Section 2.4.4). Other complications (device or procedure related) can include aortic rupture during deployment, angulation, migration, or collapse of the stent graft, false aneurysm formation at the proximal or distal end of the stent graft, graft erosion, or stent frame fracture.106 A retrograde type A dissection is associated with devastating outcomes. TEVAR for aortic dissection is particularly prone to retrograde type A aortic dissection. The risk of retrograde type A dissection seems to be increased with the use of proximal balloon dilatation, proximal bare metal stents, and with rigid non-compliant devices.107 To facilitate the patient selection process, important anatomical and clinical features that characterize the aortic dissection pathology were recently summarized in a new categorisation scheme (DISSECT), which may be helpful in making the decision of whether or not to intervene.108
Endovascular repair of ATBAD can be technically challenging and optimal results can be obtained in high volume centres with considerable endovascular experience and a multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of aortic diseases.6,100 Chronic post-TEVAR aortic dilatation may be observed in patients with persistent and patent FL.87,92,109 Therefore, life long clinical and imaging surveillance are advised in this situation6 (see also Section 4.).
Figure undfig9
3.1.1.2.3 Open repair
The aim of OR in the treatment of ATBAD is to replace the DTA with a graft and excise the intimal tear, to restore peripheral perfusion and treat or prevent aortic rupture. Partial cardiopulmonary bypass has been widely used and hypothermic circulatory arrest has been adopted for cerebral protection in a subset of patients who were managed by OR approaches.110–112 There are no randomized controlled trials available to compare the different OR techniques and the level of evidence supporting various techniques is low. In patients presenting with complications such as imminent rupture, rapid expansion, or malperfusion syndromes, classic OR carries a significant risk of morbidity, including irreversible spinal injury and post-operative death.110–112 Surgical aortic fenestration or extra-anatomical bypass has been used for treating complicated ATBAD, but with the introduction of minimally invasive techniques, this procedure is only used as an alternative when endovascular repair fails or is contraindicated.113
Although the results of OR have improved over the last few decades,114–117 complications remain high, with in hospital mortality rates ranging from 25% to 50%.70,71,115,116 Pre-operative conditions heavily influence outcomes following surgical repair.71 Patients older than 70 years with hypotension or shock have less favourable outcomes, while those, normotensive at the time of surgery, have better outcomes.71 Complications affect 40–80% of patients undergoing open repair.115 Neurological complications such as paraplegia (2.3–6.6%), paraparesis (0–3.1%), and stroke (2.7–6.6%) are associated with the extent and duration of the operation.71,88,115,116 Benefits from extracorporeal circulation in the reduction of neurological complications and renal ischaemia remain controversial.88,114,115 Other complications include myocardial ischaemia or infarction, respiratory failure, visceral ischaemia, sepsis, multiorgan failure, and limb ischaemia.71,88,114–116
Figure undfig10
3.1.2 Intramural haematoma and penetrating aortic ulcer
3.1.2.1 Definition and natural history
Intramural haematoma (IMH) is defined as the presence of blood within the aortic wall without intimal disruption or an identifiable entry point on imaging. IMH may be a precursor to both classic AD and penetrating aortic ulcer (PAU). It is distinguished from AD by the absence of an intimal flap and from PAU by the absence of any connection with the aortic lumen.117 Most cases of IMH (50–85%) are located in the DTA. At least 5–15% of patients admitted with IMH have an AD. The exact pathophysiology underlying IMH remains controversial. One theory suggests that IMH is a consequence of rupture of vasa vasorum in the medial layer of the aortic wall, which then causes a secondary tear into the aortic lumen. This process is typically associated with hypertension and is initiated by aortic wall infarction. Another theory suggests that IMH results following an intimal entry tear, allowing blood from the aortic lumen to enter the aortic wall. The blood then thromboses within the intimal layer so that no entry tears can be detected.117,118 Modern imaging suggests that IMH, PAU, and AD can develop from each other and, therefore, they are likely to be variants of the same pathological process. IMH evolves longitudinally between the medial layers and may progress, regress, or remain unchanged.117 IMH has identical clinical manifestations and treatment principles to those of AD. The classification of IMH follows that of the Stanford classification of AD. Type A IMH involves the ascending aorta. Type B IMH is localised in the aortic arch and in the DTA.118
Cross sectional imaging techniques (CTA, MRA) are used to differentiate between IMH, PAU, and AD. The characteristic finding of IMH on axial imaging is a thickening of the aortic wall greater than 5 mm in an eccentric or concentric pattern. Mural thrombus has an irregular luminal surface, narrows the lumen, and does not extend longitudinally as much as IMH. Discrimination between IMH and acute dissection with a thrombosed FL may be difficult. Unenhanced CT acquisition is crucial for the diagnosis of IMH. A high attenuation crescentic thickening of the aortic wall, extending in a longitudinal, non-spiral fashion, is pathognomonic. The aortic lumen is preserved and the luminal wall is curvilinear and smooth, as opposed to a rough, irregular border seen with aortic atherosclerosis and PAU. IMH is generally a more localised process than classic AD, which typically propagates along the entire aorta to the iliac arteries.119
The natural history of type B IMH is similar to that of ATBAD.7,51 Conservative medical treatment is used for isolated uncomplicated type B IMH.120 Treatment with β-blockers has a survival rate of 95%, compared with 67% for those treated without β-blockade.120 IMH, if associated with PAU, has a significantly worse prognosis with a higher risk of expansion and rupture.51 Regression of acute IMH occurs in one third, progression in 20%, and up to 40% evolve into AD.7 Indications for treatment in type B IMH are refractory chest pain, evidence of increasing size of the expanding haematoma, aortic rupture, and a progressive pleural effusion.7,51,120
Similarly, there is also considerable controversy regarding the aetiology of PAU.51 PAU may result from progressive erosion of atheromatous mural plaque with penetration of the elastic lamina. PAU may also develop in younger patients with intimal tears which remain localised and fail to progress to AD or IMH. PAU is more often present in the DTA and occurs more often in older patients with arterial hypertension, hyperlipoproteinaemia, and aortic sclerosis. Complicated PAU involves degeneration towards pseudoaneurysm formation, dissection, or rupture. Careful imaging is needed to evaluate both the diameter and depth of PAU.119 Although the specific growth rate is unknown, 20–30% of asymptomatic PAUs show evidence of progression over time.119
Symptomatic PAUs have an ominous natural history of progression and rupture. Urgent repair is commonly recommended in this setting.119,121 Currently, there is a lack of data concerning the natural history of patients with asymptomatic PAU. Progression with pseudoaneurysm formation may occur in 15–50% of cases. The association between aortic diameter and rupture risk remains unclear. However, patients with a PAU that initially measures >20 mm in diameter or >10 mm in depth have a high risk of disease progression and should be considered candidates for early endovascular repair.119,121
3.1.2.2 Management
Patients presenting with uncomplicated type B IMH are primarily treated by medical therapy and intensive care monitoring, in line with the management of AD (see Section 3.1.1.2.1).122
Endovascular repair is currently indicated in symptomatic or complicated patients or in those with evolution towards AD because of a higher risk of peri-operative morbidity and the risk of rupture.121 Endovascular repair is associated with lower peri-operative morbidity and mortality than OR.123–125 Nevertheless, the role of endovascular repair in patients with type B IMH is debatable and identifying appropriate indications for treatment is critical. Although the literature provides no compelling guidelines for treatment, the WC recommends that treatment of IMH should follow similar guidelines as for the treatment of AD in the corresponding segment of the aorta, especially if it is associated with an evolving PAU, expansion of IMH, intimal tear disruption, or peri-aortic haematoma or progression to AD.119
Indications and the choice of treatment of PAU are similar to IMH. High mortality rates have been reported for OR119; therefore, endovascular repair is the preferred first line treatment.123 According to the largest published series, specific aortic diameter, neck length and depth of PAU were not required for endovascular repair. Indications were pain and increase of the total aortic diameter at the level of the PAU.121 In the absence of RCT, the level of evidence for the treatment of PAU is low. There is currently no evidence based treatment recommendation available to support treatment of asymptomatic PAU beyond blood pressure control.
Figure undfig11
3.1.3 Ruptured aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta
3.1.3.1 Definition
Most thoracic aortic aneurysms are either located in the ascending aorta or the DTA, but either type can extend into the aortic arch. Rupture risk correlates with aneurysm diameter. Aortic rupture is defined as disruption of all the layers of the aortic wall (intima, media, and adventitia). In the acute phase, active extravasation of blood (as detected by contrast enhanced CTA, MRA, or echocardiography), is pathognomonic for rupture. Generally, DTAA rupture is contained by periaortic structures (pleura, pericardium) or intrathoracic organs (oesophagus, lungs, heart).
3.1.3.2 Management
Rupture of the DTAA is an acute condition resulting in a high mortality. Most patients die before receiving treatment or do not survive treatment. Survivors are at risk of multisystem organ failure and/or cerebral/spinal insult. Traditionally, DTAA rupture has been treated by OR but, in the last few decades, endovascular repair has emerged as an alternative option in selected patients. Symptomatic and ruptured DTAAs should be treated urgently because of the risk of imminent exsanguination and death.
3.1.3.2.1 Open repair
Traditionally, ruptured DTAA has been managed by open repair. A recent meta-analysis of 224 patients with ruptured DTAA demonstrated a 30 day mortality of 33% for patients treated with OR.126 Major complications of myocardial infarction, stroke, and paraplegia have been reported to occur in 11.1%, 10.2%, and 5.5%, respectively. Another recent multicenter, retrospective review of 69 patients with ruptured DTAA published by the same authors demonstrated a composite outcome of death, stroke, or permanent paraplegia in 36.2%.127 These results were confirmed by a larger study, including data from the US Nationwide Inpatient Sample data on 559 patients with ruptured DTAA, with a reported mortality rate of 28.6%.128 These data confirm that OR for ruptured DTAA is associated with high mortality and morbidity.
3.1.3.2.2 Endovascular repair
TEVAR has emerged as a less invasive therapeutic option for the management of ruptured DTAA. No prospective, randomized study has compared stent grafting versus OR in the treatment of ruptured DTAA. However, the results of meta-analyses and multicentre studies suggest lower mortality and complication rates following TEVAR.126–128
In a recent meta-analysis comparing endovascular repair and OR for ruptured DTAA, the 30 day mortality was 19% and 33%, respectively.126 Lower rates of myocardial infarction (3.5%), stroke (4.1%), and paraplegia (3.1%) were noted for endovascular repair. The composite outcome of death, stroke, and myocardial infarction was 21.7% in the TEVAR group compared with 36.2% in the OR group (odds ratio 0.49, 95% CI 0.24–0.97, p = .044). By contrast, in the study using the US Nationwide Inpatient Sample data, TEVAR was not associated with a significantly lower mortality rate compared with OR (23.4% vs. 28.6%, respectively, p > .1).128
The need for LSA revascularisation in challenging proximal aortic neck anatomy is controversial, especially in acute cases. LSA coverage, to achieve a satisfactory proximal seal during TEVAR for ruptured DTAA, is reported in up to 38% of cases. LSA revascularisation was not performed in most of these cases.127,128 Comprehensive data regarding the rationale for LSA coverage without revascularisation are unavailable. In one study, subclavian artery bypass was performed in half of the cases (10/19 covered) before TEVAR.129 In cases in which the LSA is to be covered, prior revascularisation of the LSA in the emergency setting is recommended in patients with a left internal mammary artery to coronary artery bypass, or in those with a clearly dominant left vertebral artery. In all other emergency patients, LSA coverage without revascularisation can be performed49,129 (see also Section 2.4.4.).
In cases with challenging distal thoracic aortic anatomy, the CA can be selectively covered. Angiography of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) after balloon occlusion of the CA can visualize adequate collateral circulation, however even with proven collateralisation, ischaemic complications can occur following CA coverage.130 Endovascular parallel or “periscope” endograft techniques, can potentially be used to maintain perfusion through the coeliac artery.131 Physician modified fenestrated endografts have also been used to maintain perfusion to the CA. The development of off the shelf fenestrated grafts may provide new options to treat acute DTA pathology involving visceral branches (see also Section 3.3.2.3.).
Figure undfig12
3.1.4 Blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury
3.1.4.1 Definition and diagnostic testing
Blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury (TAI) most often occurs after sudden deceleration as a result of head on or side impact collisions, usually in high speed motor vehicle accidents or falls from great heights.
The classic site of TAI is at the aortic isthmus in about 55–90% of patients admitted to hospital alive. Other regions of the thoracic aorta are less often affected.132,133 Trauma to the distal segment of the thoracic aorta can be associated with injury to the diaphragm and adjacent compression fractures of the thoracic spine.132
After traumatic brain injury, TAI is the second most common cause of death in blunt trauma patients. The morbidity and mortality of this injury are high, causing sudden death in 80–90% of cases.134 With improved rescue and rapid detection of TAI, patients who initially survive are more likely to undergo successful repair.
The damage incurred in TAI can be partial or circumferential. With more accurate diagnostic tools, the term “minimal aortic injury”, which implies the presence of a small intimal flap with minimal to no peri-aortic haematoma, has been introduced to describe a lesion that carries a low risk of rupture.135 A classification scheme for TAI has been proposed: type I (intimal tear), type II (intramural haematoma), type III (pseudoaneurysm), and type IV (rupture).136
About 2–8% of patients with an initially unrecognized TAI may develop a chronic post-traumatic pseudoaneurysm.137 There are only a few reports on the natural history of this type of pseudoaneurysm. The largest series reporting 413 patients was published in 1982.138 Up to 85% underwent surgical repair, and one third of the remaining patients died from their untreated lesions within 20 years of the initial trauma. Other authors report the development of late symptoms in about 50%, with aneurysmal expansion in about 20%, and death secondary to aortic rupture in 20% within 15 years of the injury.139
Clinical presentation ranges from non-specific symptoms to thoracic or interscapular pain. Signs of chest wall injury, pseudo-coarctation syndrome, a systolic murmur, or paraplegia can be present. The risk assessment for TAI begins with a high index of suspicion based on the mechanism of injury. Abdominal injury, thoracic injury, hypotension, and lack of restraint in motor vehicle accidents have been identified as clinical predictors of TAI. The greater the blunt trauma force the higher the index of suspicion for TAI should be.140
Initial plain chest X-rays have a significant false negative rate in patients with TAI. Consequently, once aortic transection is suspected, computed tomography evaluation is recommended.141 CTA has replaced angiography as the first line diagnostic test for TAI.142 CTA is quick and reproducible, with a near 100% sensitivity and specificity in identifying TAI. In addition, CTA is ideal for evaluating non-arterial trauma such as brain, spinal, pelvic, splenic, liver, and kidney damage in patients with multiple injuries. CTA findings, associated with TAI, include mediastinal haematoma, haemothorax, pseudoaneurysm formation, variation of aortic contour, and presence of intimal flap and thrombus. DSA now has a very limited role in TAI detection.142
With the increasing use of TEVAR, IVUS has been advocated as having an important role in the evaluation of selected patients with suspected TAI.143 Most of the patients who undergo TEVAR for TAI are young.144,145 These patients have a healthy and elastic aortic wall, with increased aortic pulsatile compliance. Aortic diameter varies in these patients by 10% (up to 18%) between systole and diastole.145 In contrast to CTA, IVUS permits a dynamic real time evaluation of aortic diameters during the cardiac cycle. Furthermore, IVUS can easily detect the origin of side branches, allowing less use of contrast with DSA. Once the stent graft is deployed, IVUS can be used to evaluate adequate expansion of the stent, excluding infolding complications.
TOE has a limited role and low sensitivity in routine screening for TAI and should not be performed at the expense of prompt evaluation of other coexisting injuries. However, DSA and TOE might be used together when CTA is not available or is equivocal.143 TOE can also be used intra-operatively to monitor myocardial function and fluid management. In addition, TOE has gained an important role in the delivery of stent grafts in TEVAR143 (see also Section 2.3.4.).
Figure undfig13
3.1.4.2 Management
The appropriate timing of any operation in patients with TAI remains controversial. In 1997, the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) published a multicentre study reporting that about 9% of patients reaching the hospital haemodynamically stable, progressed to free rupture. The majority of these ruptures occurred within 24 hours.146 For this reason, immediate treatment of TAI was considered the standard of care for many years.
More recent studies147,148 have shown a reduction in paralysis and mortality with delayed treatment. In 2008, a prospective, observational, multicentre study by the AAST demonstrated similar complication rates, but a significantly higher mortality in patients who underwent early repair when compared with delayed repair. The study concluded that patients with TAI and associated major injuries are more likely to benefit from delayed intervention.149
This conclusion is consistent with an extensive review of the literature150 including 139 studies and 7,768 patients, which did not show a significant difference in mortality between early (within 24 hours) and delayed (after 24 hours) repair, suggesting that repair can be delayed if other extensive injuries require stabilisation. These conclusions are consistent with the guidelines of The Society of Vascular Surgery, which suggest urgent repair (within 24 hours) barring other serious concomitant non-aortic injuries, or repair immediately after other injuries have been treated but prior to hospital discharge.151
The type of aortic injury is also a determining factor in the timing of intervention. Patients with a 15 mm or larger arch haematoma were significantly more likely to die from TAI than those with a smaller haematoma. By contrast, minimal aortic injuries that present with an intimal tear and occur in 10% of patients with TAI may be managed expectantly with serial imaging for surveillance.135,151
Figure undfig14
3.1.4.2.1 Open repair
OR of a TAI at the classic isthmus location requires exposure of the aorta through a left fourth interspace thoracotomy with single right lung ventilation to improve surgical exposure. The aorta is clamped at the origin of the LSA and distal to the vessel injury. Until the mid-1980s, most of these procedures were completed with an expeditious clamp-and-sew technique. Although there are isolated reports of reasonable outcomes,152 meta-analyses of this technique have reported a mortality of 16–31% and a paraplegia rate of 5–19%.147,148,153
Various methods of distal aortic perfusion have been used to protect the spinal cord. Early techniques used heparin-bonded intraluminal shunts (passive perfusion).153 Meta-analyses and large-cohort studies of active versus passive perfusion showed a decrease in the rate of post-operative paraplegia from 19% to 3% and a mortality reduction from 30% to 12% in favour of active perfusion with partial cardiopulmonary bypass154 (see also Section 2.4.2.).
Optimal peri-operative patient management with a skilled trauma team is mandatory to establish the correct timing and treatment priorities. Aggressive fluid administration that may exacerbate bleeding, coagulopathy, and rupture should be avoided. MAP should not exceed 80 mm Hg.136 Hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg), and peri-aortic haematoma size (≥15 mm) were found to be independent risk factors for early mortality in patients with TAI.144
In patients suffering severe brain injury with elevated intracranial pressure and haemorrhage or significant lung injury, delayed repair of TAI is preferable to avoid further brain or respiratory deterioration.133
3.1.4.2.2 Endovascular repair
The first TEVAR procedure for a post-traumatic aortic pseudoaneurysm was performed in 1987 by Nicolai Volodos in Ukraine.155 Since then, TEVAR has become the “first choice treatment” for TAI for many authors because of good early and late results.126,129,136,147,149,152,156–161 Data extracted from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample in 2006 showed a significant change from OR to TEVAR in the USA.162 A recent non-systematic review of the literature159 identified 62 retrospective reviews or studies and six meta-analyses. A subgroup analysis of these papers showed that the TEVAR population was older, whereas patients in the OR group were more often unstable. Compared to OR, TEVAR showed a significantly reduced mortality (9.7% vs. 27.7%; p < .001) and a trend towards reduced paralysis (0.4% vs. 2.9%). OR of TAI was associated with a reduced stroke rate (0.4% vs. 2.3%). Combining these neurological complications (paralysis and stroke), the complication rate was comparable between the two groups. Overall, the endoleak incidence was 5.2% (type I proximal in almost all cases). There was a 1% migration rate in this cohort and stent collapse occurred in 2.5% of cases with an associated mortality of 12.9%. Similar advantages were found in a systematic review in terms of survival and a decreased incidence of paraplegia with TEVAR, when compared with OR. This review reported an early endoleak rate of 4.2% and a stent collapse rate of 1.2%. The latter complication was fatal in 30% of cases.160
Most TAI occur in young patients, who are more likely to have acute curvature of the aortic arch. This anatomical variant may limit the optimal apposition of the stent graft to the inner aortic curvature, leading to “bird beaking” and an increased risk of endoleak and stent collapse.163 The average diameter of the thoracic aorta, proximal and distal to the rupture site, is 19 mm in patients with trauma. Excessive oversizing (>20%) has been associated with an increased risk of device collapse.163 With respect to pre-operative CTA measurements, stent grafts should be oversized by about 10%. More aggressive oversizing may be applied in gravely hypotensive patients, but not exceeding 20%. Hypotension may lead to inadvertent undersizing of the stent graft with a consequent increased risk of migration, endoleak, and/or graft collapse once resuscitation is fully achieved.164 Where possible, delayed TEVAR may allow complete resuscitation. In these cases, serial CTA imaging can provide more reliable data regarding the actual aortic measurements for stent graft sizing.164
The necessity of LSA coverage during TEVAR for TAI was reported in 30% of cases in recent reviews.150,160 As in other pathological situations, in the emergency setting LSA revascularisation is recommended in patients with left internal mammary artery to coronary artery bypass, and when the presence of a dominant left vertebral artery assures a better posterior cerebral perfusion compared with the right49,129 (see also Sections 2.4.2. and 3.1.3.2.2.).
A separate consideration should be applied to chronic post-traumatic pseudoaneurysms, which have different anatomical characteristics from degenerative aneurysms, in that they are typically localised, calcified saccular lesions located just distal to the LSA, making them attractive targets for endovascular repair.165
The indications for late surgical intervention after aortic injury are not the same as those for other types of DTAA (see also Section 3.3.).
Follow up strategies after TEVAR for TAI deserve a special mention. A combination of multi-view chest X-rays and MRA, rather than CTA, may be considered166 (see also Section 4.).
Figure undfig15
3.2 Chronic type B aortic dissections
3.2.1 Definition and natural history
Historically, TBAD is defined as “chronic” when 14 days have elapsed from the acute event. This temporal classification is based on the fact that 70% of deaths from aortic dissection occur within 2 weeks of onset.167 The risk of death following dissection remains high during the first 3 months and, in recent years, it has been suggested that a separate category of dissection, termed sub-acute (between 2 weeks and 3 months of the initial dissection), should be included. Additionally, the potential for endograft-stimulated aortic remodelling within this time period is higher.98
In general, chronic type B aortic dissection (CTBAD) also includes patients with a residual TBAD after repair of a type A dissection (De Bakey type I dissection).168 Aortic related complications may occur in 20–50% of patients with CTBAD.169 Overall, it is estimated that approximately 20–40% of patients with CTBAD develop enlargement of the FL that warrants treatment and approximately 25% of DTAA or TAAA are associated with AD.170 Aside from aneurysmal degeneration, aortic related complications include recurrent dissection, retrograde dissection, and rupture of the FL. The expansion rate of the chronically dissected aorta is not well known but ranges between 1 and 7 mm per year.171 Hypertension, an aortic diameter of 40 mm or more in the acute phase, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and patency of the FL have been recognized as risk factors for late aneurysmal degeneration.169 In addition, the presence of an entry tear larger than 10 mm in diameter or located in the arch or proximal DTA has been recognized as a predictor of late mortality and the consequent need for aortic repair.168 Moreover, in patients treated for type A dissection with a patent distal FL, a large area of the FL (>70% of the total aortic area) is considered to be a predictor of aneurysmal degeneration.202
Conversely, FL thrombosis has been associated with a slower growth rate.172,173 Interestingly, partial distal FL thrombosis has been shown to be an independent predictor of mortality after hospital discharge in patients with a CTBAD.174 The responsible mechanism may be increased FL pressure resulting from a large entry tear without outflow.175 In addition, an increased risk of rupture in aneurysms resulting from AD has been observed when compared with degenerative aneurysms,176 although there is insufficient evidence to support treatment at a lower diameter.
Long-term survival after uncomplicated type B dissections remains relatively poor. An analysis of the IRAD database has shown that late mortality is high in patients discharged from the hospital after ATBAD, approaching 25% within 3 years.85 Most deaths in patients with CTBAD are related to comorbid conditions.92
3.2.2 Management
Aggressive medical therapy and close surveillance of the aorta remains the cornerstone of management to reduce the risk of late mortality and aortic complications. In a non-randomized, observational study, improved survival was shown in patients treated with β-blockers in the chronic phase of AD. This study reported an 80% freedom from aortic events at a mean of 4.2 years in patients on β-blockers, in comparison with 47% freedom from aortic events in patients treated with other antihypertensive agents. The efficacy of other antihypertensive drugs has not been specifically demonstrated in patients with CTBAD, although these drugs have a role in maintaining appropriate blood pressure (systolic below 130 mm Hg and diastolic below 85 mm Hg).80
Several studies have suggested that 40–70% of late deaths in patients with CTBAD are caused by comorbid diseases, mainly heart disease and stroke,177 emphasizing that cardiovascular risk factors should be thoroughly assessed and treated in this group. Interestingly, cigarette smoking does not seem to affect aortic expansion and rupture rates,178 although its detrimental role on cardiovascular risk is well established.
Figure undfig16
3.2.2.1 Indications for repair
The main goal of aortic repair in patients with CTBAD is to avoid aneurysmal degeneration and rupture of the aorta. The presence of malperfusion also mandates repair. Clinical and radiological factors may indicate the need for treatment.
New onset symptoms of AAS, such as lumbar back pain not caused by other conditions, hypotension, a new peripheral pulse deficit or blood pressure differential, new focal neurological deficit, or signs of end-organ malperfusion in patients with chronic dissection, mandate immediate evaluation to exclude rupture or progression of the dissection.171
In asymptomatic patients, the maximum aneurysm diameter remains the most important indicator for treatment. A large aortic diameter is associated with increased rupture risk, and several authors have shown that an aortic diameter between 50 and 60 mm is associated with rupture in almost 20% of cases.92,97,167,179 It should be acknowledged that there is a paucity of literature describing the aortic rupture risk in relation to aortic diameters in patients with CTBAD.
3.2.2.2 Open repair
Despite the lack of data regarding comparison between open and endovascular repair, OR remains the standard treatment in low surgical risk patients with CTBAD because of an improvement in surgical results over the last 20 years.41,54,180 It should be noted that although several authors specifically report low surgical risk as a prerequisite for OR, the definition of surgical risk in thoracic aortic surgery is difficult. The most commonly used cardiac surgery risk models (European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation - EuroSCORE, Department of Veterans Affairs Continuous Improvement in Cardiac Surgery Program - CICSP) report contradictory results when applied to thoracic aortic surgery. In particular, a Japanese study showed that the logistic EuroSCORE was able to reliably predict in hospital mortality in 327 consecutive thoracic aortic procedures.181 Conversely, an American study reported that both the EuroSCORE and the CICSP greatly overestimated operative mortality rates in a series of 100 patients treated in a tertiary centre182 (see also Section 3.4.2.2.).
The mainstays of surgical repair of chronic dissection are similar to those of thoracic aortic aneurysms or TAAA. Patients with chronic dissections typically require a more complex operative repair because of the presence of the intimal flap. This can lead to longer operation times with increased risk of bleeding, SCI, and renal failure.183
Aneurysms caused by chronic dissection are generally more extensive than degenerative aneurysms and also develop in younger patients. Several extracorporeal circulation methods and adjunctive measures for end organ and spinal cord protection have been described. Differing opinions exist regarding the use of these adjunctive methods (see also Section 2.4.).
Figure undfig17
In early reports on OR treatment, chronic dissection was a risk factor for paraplegia with an incidence approaching 30–35%.184 Indeed, these patients seem to have a different pre-operative risk profile compared with those with degenerative aneurysms, as they are more likely to present in an emergency/urgent fashion, have a connective tissue disorder, and be Crawford type I and II TAAA.183 With the introduction of surgical adjuncts, the negative predictive value of chronic dissection on paraplegia has been reduced and, at present, is not considered a predictor of SCI in thoraco-abdominal aneurysm repair185 (see also Sections 2.4. and 3.4.2.2.).
In numerous contemporary, single centre series of patients with complex aortic pathologies treated by OR, reported mortality rates range from 6% to 11%, with paraplegia/paraparesis being reported in 3.6–12%.41,180,183–185 In contrast to high volume centres, national registries and community based outcome analyses suggest that the mortality for the overall treatment of dissections by OR techniques is significantly higher and may exceed 20%.186 These data reinforce the recommendation for centralisation of OR for chronic type B dissection, as well as for TAAA (see also Section 3.4.2.2.).
Figure undfig18
3.2.2.3 Endovascular repair
Since 1999, endovascular repair has been used increasingly in the treatment of CTBAD.90 The goal of endovascular repair is to seal the proximal entry tear, facilitate aortic remodelling to achieve thrombosis of the FL, and thereby reduce the likelihood of aortic rupture in the mid- to long-term. The technique of endovascular repair involves placement of a stent graft over the primary entry tear in the DTA, usually via a trans-femoral route.
There are limited data comparing endovascular with OR for CTBAD. A published series of 24 patients undergoing repair of chronic dissection, showed mortality in the endovascular group of 0% compared with 33% in the open group.90 National registry data support an improved long-term outcome in patients undergoing endovascular repair of AD in comparison with OR.186 More recently, larger series have supported the concept that endovascular repair of CTBAD is associated with lower morbidity. A recent systematic review of TEVAR for chronic AD detailed 567 cases. In this review, the early (30 day or in hospital) mortality was 3.2%, the incidence of stroke 0.82%, and SCI occurred in 0.43%.187
Endovascular repair of chronic dissection appears to be associated with lower mortality and morbidity rates than for AD, a difference attributable to the high incidence of emergency procedures in the acute setting. There is now a reasonably robust body of evidence to support the assertion that endovascular repair of chronic dissections may be achieved with mortality rates below 5% and a low incidence of neurological complications, even in complicated cases.88,188
In the previously mentioned systematic review, the median length of follow up was 26 months. The all cause mortality rate was 9.2%. The mid-term aortic related mortality from those studies was 4.2%. The most common delayed complication was the development of aneurysms of the distal aorta or continuation of FL perfusion with aneurysmal dilatation (7.8%). Delayed aortic rupture was reported in 3.0%. No studies reported whether rupture occurred within or distal to the stented segment, or following persistent FL perfusion. Rates of complete FL thrombosis ranged from 38% to 100% (median 86%) in studies with a median follow up of 17 months. Studies reporting mid-term follow up of aortic morphology observed a reduction of the FL diameter in 79% of patients, FL expansion occurred in 15%, and TL expansion in 66%. Data from this review should be interpreted carefully because of the poor quality of the studies included.187
The advent of thoracic endografting has opened up a potential therapeutic avenue for patients with uncomplicated sub-acute type B thoracic dissection. Without interventional therapy, a substantial proportion of these patients will go on to develop a large aneurysmal chronic dissection that may require therapy.169 Treatment of chronic dissections is difficult and from an endovascular perspective, requires extensive thoracic coverage because of poor aortic plasticity. It has been hypothesized that a subset of patients with sub-acute dissection (between 2 and 12 weeks after the index process), could be identified on the basis of morphological and physiological characteristics that predispose to formation of aneurysmal chronic dissection. These patients might then be preferentially treated in the sub-acute phase.
Patients with sub-acute TBAD have a low endovascular repair mortality rate and a significantly greater aortic plasticity than patients with chronic dissections. Although attractive as a hypothesis, the morphological features that predict late expansion are not fully defined189 and further research is needed in this field.
The INSTEAD trial randomized patients with sub-acute and chronic dissections to early endovascular repair or best medical management and surveillance. Although aortic remodelling was greater in the endovascular group, there were no statistically significant differences between the groups regarding 2 year mortality. Later follow up results have been published recently.190 It has been demonstrated that TEVAR, in addition to optimal medical treatment, was associated with improved 5 year aorta specific survival and delayed disease progression. The authors concluded that in cases of stable CTBAD with suitable anatomy, preemptive TEVAR should be considered to improve late outcomes. A proportion of patients with sub-acute dissection may, therefore, benefit from early endovascular repair,190 especially in those at risk of further aortic complications.168,169,172–174,189
One issue that requires clarification is whether endovascular repair is effective in reducing aortic related death in the mid- to long-term. OR series demonstrate a high early aortic related mortality, but effective prevention of aortic related death in the long term.180 Data regarding prevention of aortic related death are less robust for endovascular techniques. A series of 76 patients reported 12 late deaths. Only one was defined as aortic related (rupture of an untreated ascending dissection).191
The ability of the aorta to remodel after endovascular repair of acute and chronic dissections has been studied. Following coverage of the primary entry tear in ATBAD, there is rapid aortic remodelling with an increase in diameter of the TL and a reduction in FL diameter.91,192 By contrast, in chronic dissections, there is less aortic remodelling and the integrity of the endovascular repair is determined by the ability of the endovascular procedure to induce FL thrombosis. In treating chronic dissections, it has been shown that FL thrombosis occurs more often in patients with limited dissection and that FL thrombosis occurs more effectively in the stented part of the DTA.191
These findings suggest that the extent of coverage of the DTA is directly related to the extent of FL thrombosis. Although SCI rates after TEVAR for chronic dissection are lower than those after TEVAR for thoracic aneurysms, increased aortic coverage may increase the risk of SCI. To reduce SCI rates, spinal cord perfusion should be maintained whenever possible through collateral channels, especially from the LSA. Irrespective of the extent of aortic coverage, the dissected portion of the aorta below the diaphragm remains untreated, and there is evidence to suggest that this region may dilate over time.91 The role of bare stents in the treatment of chronic dissection, and the effect that these stents have on aortic remodeling, remain undefined at the present time.99
The available literature regarding TEVAR for chronic dissection in patients with MFS is sparse.193 Early technical feasibility has been demonstrated, but long-term outcomes remain uncertain. The fragility of the aorta in MFS and other associated conditions poses a problem for proximal aortic fixation and may lead to the development of complications (see also Section 3.7.1.1.).
Recently, new endovascular techniques have been tested to induce FL thrombosis in chronic CTBAD. Despite the feasibility and the early usefulness that have been demonstrated in selected patients in highly experienced centres, it is too early for widespread adoption and for a general recommendation statement.194
Figure undfig19
3.3 Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms
3.3.1 Definition and natural history
Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms (DTAA) are defined as any aortic dilatation with at least a 50% increase in diameter located in any segment of the aorta between the LSA origin and the diaphragm (see also Section 2.1. for normal values). Histopathologically, it is characterized by medial degeneration, with disruption and loss of elastic fibres and increased deposition of proteoglycans, with or without atherosclerosis.
At any given increased size of various aortic segments, the expansion rate is greatest in the DTA. There are many other factors that affect the expansion rate apart from diameter and anatomical location including smoking, intraluminal thrombus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and vascular disease.195 Once diagnosed, the prognosis of large degenerative aneurysms (more than 60 mm in diameter) is poor if not treated, with a 3 year survival of approximately 20%.196
3.3.2 Management
The rate of expansion is important in deciding the frequency of surveillance in DTAA. Risk factors for rupture include maximum aneurysm diameter, age, gender, active smoking status, diastolic hypertension, and aneurysm related pain.9,176,196,197
3.3.2.1 Indications for repair
An initial diameter of 60 mm carries an annual risk of rupture of 10%. For DTAA, there is a threshold of 70 mm at which the risk of rupture suddenly escalates.127 Intervention in aneurysms below 55 mm may not afford a survival benefit, although a randomized controlled trial is necessary to evaluate the possible benefit of repair in the small aneurysm group.9 This threshold can be reduced to 50–55 mm for women or in the setting of connective tissue disorders (see also Section 3.7.1.).54,88
3.3.2.2 Open repair
Indications for OR of a DTAA are limited to fit patients (see also Section 3.3.2.3.) unsuitable for TEVAR such as those with:
1)
Absence of adequate arterial access197 or a contraindication to aortic/iliac conduit graft placement (presence of hostile abdomen, severe aorto-iliac disease). The use of an aortic/iliac sidearm graft is required in approximately 15% of cases.54
2)
Absence of proximal or distal landing zones.
3)
DTA associated with a connective tissue disorder such as MFS, or DTA in young, healthy patients without major contraindications for OR.54,88
4)
Prohibitively high risk of neurological deficit post-TEVAR caused by full extent DTAA in patients with previous abdominal aortic surgery, reducing pelvic circulation and occlusion of the lumbar arteries.45,198–200
5)
Symptoms related to compression by a large DTAA of adjacent structures such as the thoracic vertebral bodies (chronic pain syndrome), trachea or left mainstem bronchus (dyspnea), or oesophagus (dysphagia).201
The extension and the location of the disease affect the surgical decision making process in terms of type of incision and use of peri-operative adjunctive measures. A classification has been proposed to define the risk of SCI during DTAA repair. Such a classification distinguishes three types of DTAA: type A, which involves the proximal DTA and ends at the level of T6; type B, which involves the distal portion of the DTA starting at the level of T6; and type C, which affects the entire DTA202 (see Fig. 2).
Figure 2 Classification of DTAA according to the extension.202
Pre-operative planning should include a CTA or MRA evaluation of the spinal cord circulation including lower lumbar and pelvic arteries, which play a major role in spinal cord blood supply in 16% and 8% of cases, respectively.198,199
The pre-operative assessments of cardiac, pulmonary, and renal function, as well as carotid and peripheral arterial occlusive disease are essential to minimize the risks of mortality and morbidity associated with DTAA repair. Additional studies such as echocardiography, cardiac catheterisation, and, in selected cases, Holter 24-hour electrocardiography monitoring, are usually requested for patients with a history of coronary or valvular heart disease. Symptomatic coronary artery disease (CAD) is always treated aggressively before aortic surgery. The management of asymptomatic patients with CAD remains controversial given recent evidence suggesting a more conservative approach203 compared with older data.204 In the evaluation of such cases, the extent of the planned procedure and the severity of the CAD determine the pre-operative strategy.
A history of smoking and the presence of COPD increase the risk of post-operative respiratory failure. Pulmonary function tests and arterial blood gas analyses should be performed in all patients.205
The risk of post-operative renal failure is higher in patients with impaired renal function. This scenario can be successfully managed by pre-operative hydration and adequate renal perfusion during the peri- and post-operative period.206
There is robust evidence showing that the risk of SCI, mesenteric and renal ischaemia is related to the duration of cross clamping, and that cross clamp time represents the most important predictor of post-operative neurological deficit.28,31,114,206 Methods of extracorporeal circulation include LHB and cardiocirculatory arrest. This more aggressive approach can prove useful in the presence of rupture or when proximal aortic clamping entails a high risk.207 However, in a retrospective analysis of 387 consecutive DTAAs, no significant paraplegia risk reduction was found by applying LHB in DTAA OR114 (see also Section 2.4.2 for prevention of spinal cord ischaemia).
Outcomes following elective OR for DTAA have improved over the past 25 years in some high volume centres.114,208,209 However, these acceptable results were not corroborated in an American National Inpatient Sample administrative database, presumably reflecting results achieved outside centres of excellence. Mortality rates in elective and emergency cases were 10% and 45%, respectively. Furthermore, spinal cord ischaemia has also been reported in the range of 11–15%.210
Figure undfig20
3.3.2.3 Endovascular repair
Evidence comparing OR and TEVAR in the treatment of DTAAs relies on systematic reviews and meta-analysis of retrospective series and non-randomized controlled or population based studies.211–215 The available results decisively favour a less invasive approach in terms of mortality, morbidity, and length of hospital stay. These results were, however, tempered by several less impressive results, such as long-term survival.213
In a meta-analysis of 17 studies with 517 elective patients treated by OR and 538 patients treated by TEVAR, the endovascular cohort demonstrated a lower 30 day mortality rate (5.57% vs. 16.5%). TEVAR was also associated with a significant reduction in peri-operative mortality (pooled OR [odds ratio] 0.36, 95% CI 0.228–0.578; p < .0001). Major neurological complications occurred in 26 TEVAR patients (5.4%) and 67 OR patients (14%). Endovascular repair was associated with a reduced risk of paraplegia (pooled OR [odds ratio] 0.33, 95% CI 0.18–0.63, p < .0007). The risk of stroke was not affected by TEVAR (pooled OR [odds ratio] 0.77, 95% CI 0.38–1.59, p = .48). TEVAR had no impact on the major re-intervention rate at 48 months (pooled OR [odds ratio] 0.91, 95% CI 0.610–1.619), which was 8.4% versus 7% for OR and TEVAR, respectively.212
SCI can occur after TEVAR. A recent observational study on 424 DTAA treated by TEVAR reported 12 cases of SCI (2.8%).216 Several reports confirm that specific anatomical conditions may represent potential risk factors for post-operative SCI. These include planned coverage of the thoracic aorta over more than 200 mm or involving the level T8-T12, previous abdominal aortic surgery with ligation of lumbar arteries, an occluded hypogastric artery, and, in the emergency setting the need for LSA coverage not amenable to revascularisation. Chronic renal failure and a peri-operative MAP lower than 70 mm Hg may also play a role in the development of SCI.216–218 In the presence of one or more such risk factors, CSF drainage should be performed to reduce the risk of SCI post TEVAR (see also Section 2.4.3.).
Intentional coverage of the LSA during TEVAR to provide adequate proximal sealing and fixation has been reported in 10–50% of cases. A robust body of evidence, based on observational studies, shows that this increases the risk of stroke, SCI, and upper limb ischaemia.44–50 An additional meta-analysis reported an almost doubled rate of cerebrovascular events (4.7% vs. 2.7%, OR [odds ratio] 2.28, 95% CI 1.24–4.09) and SCI (2.8% vs. 2.3%, OR [odds ratio] 2.39, 95% CI 1.30–4.39, p = .005), when the LSA was covered219 (see also Sections 2.4.3. and 2.4.4.).
An inadequate distal landing zone of less than 15 mm length and a proximal neck diameter exceeding 40 mm are contraindications for TEVAR with currently available devices.215,220 These anatomical limitations occurred more commonly than the rate of 4.4% previously reported in a multicentre review of TEVAR.220 In spite of these data, safe coverage of the CA has been described to achieve acceptable distal sealing and fixation.221 CTA is suitable to assess anatomical details of the distal DTA and the proximal abdominal aorta; however, selective angiography of the CA and SMA remains the most reliable test to predict the role of potential collateral circulation following CA coverage during TEVAR.221
Contraindications to CA coverage include the presence of a common coeliaco-mesenteric trunk, the absence of adequate angiographic evidence of collateral circulation, poor portal vein perfusion, and any previous conventional or endovascular procedure that may have compromised the collateral circulation.221
An alternative solution to CA coverage in certain situations is a scallop-designed endograft or the use of a “snorkel or chimney technique”. The use of these techniques is promising, although supported by only few data.
Figure undfig21
3.4 Thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysms
3.4.1 Definition
Crawford first described the extent of thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAA) and his classification has found general acceptance. Type I TAAAs start at the level of the LSA, or at least proximal to the level of the sixth vertebra (T6) and affect the entire DTA, involve the visceral arteries and end at the renal arteries. The aneurysm can involve the origin of the LSA or even involve the distal aortic arch. Type II TAAAs start at the same level as a type I, but involve the DTA and the entire abdominal aorta. In many patients, especially those suffering from connective tissue diseases and post-dissection aneurysms, the iliac arteries are aneurysmal as well. Type III TAAAs start more distal than type II aneurysms, usually at the level of T6, and extend distally as in a type II. Type IV TAAAs start at the level of the diaphragm and involve the entire abdominal aorta, with or without extension to the iliac arteries. A type V TAAA starts below the sixth intercostal space and tapers just above the renal arteries (Fig. 3).222
Figure 3 Crawford TAAA classification modified by Safi.222
Using this classification, an international consensus has been achieved on describing the extent of aneurysmal disease. Both in open and endovascular repair, this classification provides an indication of the extent of the procedure, the likely technical challenges involved in any repair, and the potential post-operative risks. For example, a type IV TAAA can technically be performed by laparotomy only, whereas all the other types require a thoraco-abdominal incision, (partial) incision of the diaphragm, and temporary collapse of the left lung, reflecting the potential for substantial differences in surgically induced trauma between these two exposures. Furthermore, the five types are each associated with different end organ complications such as paraplegia, renal failure, and visceral ischaemia.
3.4.2 Management
3.4.2.1 Indications for repair
It is extremely important to assess the risk of any intervention against the risk of rupture. Extensive pre-operative risk analysis is required as an essential part of the decision making process, especially in patients with comorbidities. General consensus exists regarding surgical repair of TAAA for low to moderate surgical risk patients with TAAA larger than 60 mm (less for patients with connective tissue disorders), rapid growth (>10 mm/year), or with symptoms.112,223
Figure undfig22
3.4.2.2 Open repair
Open TAAA repair is a major aortic intervention and is associated with post-operative complications including myocardial infarction, respiratory failure, renal insufficiency, stroke, paraplegia, and death. To estimate the risks of OR, pre-operative cardiopulmonary and renal assessment is required. Patients with degenerative TAAA are usually older than patients with post-dissection or connective tissue disease aneurysms. A substantial number (34–40%) will suffer from CAD, and compromised cardiac function is a strong predictor of post-operative mortality.224 In patients with COPD and in smokers, pulmonary function is significantly reduced in 23–36%, leading to oxygenation problems during peri-operative single-lung ventilation, prolonged post-operative ventilatory support, and pneumonia.225 Pre-operative spirometry and blood gas analysis can detect pulmonary compromise, and appropriate respiratory training programmes and medical treatment can be initiated to improve lung function. Pre-existing renal insufficiency is also a predictor of post-operative renal failure and mortality and should be taken into account when considering OR.226
In OR, proximal aortic cross-clamping causes increased pre- and after-load on the heart. In addition, all organs and tissues distal to the clamp will be excluded from the circulation, including the spinal cord, visceral organs, kidneys, and legs. The application of extracorporeal circulation with distal aortic perfusion has reduced ischaemic complications. Several techniques for extracorporeal circulation can be used, including LHB by means of a left atriofemoral bypass circuit or femoral veno-arterial bypass40,227 (see also Sections 2.4.2. and 3.3.2.2.).
During TAAA repair, the CA and the SMA should be perfused with blood and both renal arteries should be perfused with either cold crystalloid or blood to reduce end-organ ischaemia.228 Despite protective measures such as antegrade mesenteric perfusion, or retrograde perfusion with sequential clamping, mucosal damage can still occur and inflammatory reactions are induced.229
Risk factors for the development of SCI include prolonged aortic cross clamp time, extensive aneurysmal disease, aortic dissection, emergency surgery, internal iliac artery exclusion, and previous abdominal aortic procedures. Several strategies to limit neurological complications include distal aortic perfusion, intercostal artery reimplantation,37 CSF drainage,29,37,230 spinal cord cooling,231 and assessment of spinal cord function peri-operatively30 (see also Section 2.4.2.).
In two recent reviews, all available strategies to prevent SCI were summarized.37,230 Despite lacking definitive proof of efficacy, compelling data exist to support the use of CSF drainage along with methods of aortic perfusion distal to the cross-clamp.230 A multimodal approach including CSF drainage, maintenance of adequate MAP, LHB, and revascularisation of intercostal arteries seems to be effective in reducing the risk of SCI.232
The majority of publications on the results of open TAAA repair originate from individual series, coming from highly specialized centers.30,225,227 The results of these experienced centres report mortality rates varying between 5% and 15%. Major complications include respiratory failure (up to 60%), neurological deficits (3–18%), and renal failure (3–15%). Outside highly specialized centres, mortality and morbidity rates are almost doubled. A United States state-wide database showed 30 day and 1 year mortality rates after elective TAAA repair of 19% and 31%, respectively.233 These results indicate that these complex procedures should be performed only in specialized centres. Indeed, adequate staff support and hospital and surgeon volume significantly influence post-operative survival. Another study234 clearly demonstrated that less experience correlated with increased post-operative mortality: in 1,542 operated patients, a significant difference (p < .001) in mortality was determined between low volume hospitals (27.4%) and high volume hospitals (15%). Also, low volume surgeons had significantly (p < .001) higher mortality rates (25.6%) compared with high volume surgeons (11.0%). These volume outcome relationships were summarized in a systematic review.235
Figure undfig23
3.4.2.3 Endovascular repair
Despite improvements in peri-operative care and various surgical adjuncts, cardiopulmonary, renal, and neurological complications such as SCI are still common problems after open TAAA repair. Thus, alternative managements have been sought, with two approaches currently under evaluation.
In the first, defined as the “hybrid approach”, visceral perfusion was safeguarded by means of an OR extra-anatomic bypass, followed by endovascular exclusion of the entire aneurysm. This approach has the advantage of limiting exposure to a laparotomy while avoiding a thoracotomy, although, this remains a considerable undertaking in unfit patients. The issue of a single stage versus two stage strategy has been debated, with higher mortality and renal failure rates associated with one stage procedures and an increased risk of death resulting from rupture while awaiting the second stage.236 Early results, in terms of mortality, SCI, and morbidity rates, generated considerable enthusiasm.237 Recent data on 5 year patency rates were also encouraging.238 Currently, the hybrid technique is usually restricted to patients with no other reasonable options, such as emergency cases or high risk patients with anatomy unfavourable for a branched endograft.
The second technique (currently in evolution) is a total endovascular repair using specifically constructed branched modular aortic grafts. The rationale for this approach grew out of the promising initial experience with fenestrated grafts, which were developed to treat juxta-renal aneurysms by endovascular means.239 Preservation of visceral flow is achieved by means of either fenestrations or branches or a combination of both on the component deployed in the region of the visceral arteries. The aortic anatomy is still a limiting factor, but the progress in imaging and device conception has begun to overcome this challenge. Initial reports of the technique have all been from single centre studies and are non-randomized.240–242 Many patients are deemed unfit for OR of TAAA, particularly older patients, and this cohort represents the group that have endovascular TAAA repair.
The published 30 day mortality rates range from 5.2% to 9.7% in the larger series (2.3%–2.6% for type IV TAAA).240–243 Rates of SCI and cardiopulmonary and renal morbidities appear to be largely in concordance with rates observed following OR.240–243 The largest series of endovascular repair of TAAA (406 patients) reported similar paraplegia risks between endovascular and OR (4.3% endovascular repair vs. 7.5% OR, respectively, p = .08).241 The SCI risk was associated with COPD, procedure duration, extent of the aortic disease, and prior aortic surgery. Clinical improvement after SCI has been reported.240
As in open procedures, patients with type I, II, or III TAAAs have a higher risk of post-operative SCI and death, when compared with type IV. In the short- to mid-term, endovascular repair appears to be durable with acceptable secondary re-intervention rates. One year survival rates between 76% and 87% were reported and were largely dependent on patient selection.239–243
The pre-operative clinical characteristics of the patients investigated in these series may mean there is a negative bias towards treating patients with greater comorbidities. Therefore, the outcome of TAAA patients managed with a minimally invasive approach, although associated with positive results, still has a consistent rate of morbidity and mortality. Patients undergoing these procedures, most of whom have been rejected for OR, remain vulnerable in the post-operative period. The relatively significant risk of in hospital death with advancing age and chronic renal failure underscores the importance of excluding patients with poor physiological status and limited life expectancy. By contrast, the encouraging mid-term results suggest that this technique has a role in relatively unfit patients, especially when performed in high volume centres.239–243
Figure undfig24
3.5 Inflammatory diseases of the descending thoracic aorta
3.5.1 Takayasu arteritis
Takayasu arteritis (TA), also known as pulseless disease, is a rare form of large vessel granulomatous vasculitis with massive intimal fibrosis and vascular narrowing, or destruction of the elastic fibres and aneurysm formation.244
The pathogenesis of TA is poorly understood. Some evidence suggests that a viral/bacterial infection of some kind, in a person with other predisposing factors (such as genetic disorders), may lead to this disease.245
The American College of Rheumatology proposed the following criteria for diagnosing TA:
1)
Age of onset younger than 40 years.
2)
Intermittent claudication.
3)
Diminished brachial artery pulse.
4)
Subclavian artery or aortic bruit.
5)
Systolic blood pressure variation greater than 10 mm Hg between arms, and
6)
Angiographic (CT, MR) evidence of aortic or aortic branch vessel stenosis.
The presence of three or more of these six criteria demonstrated a high sensitivity and specificity for the disease.245
The clinical manifestation of TA is typically described in two phases: 1) a systemic “acute” phase, and 2) a “chronic” phase. These two phases are not always distinct and patients may have features of both phases at the same time. In the systemic phase, patients have symptoms and signs of an active inflammatory disease. These may include “constitutional symptoms” (fever, fatigue, weight loss), arthritis, and non-specific aches and pains. This phase is succeeded by the chronic phase, typical for symptoms presenting in affected organs. Patients may experience claudication of upper and/or lower limbs, symptoms associated with cerebrovascular insufficiency (dizziness on standing up, headaches, visual problems, transient ischaemic attack, or stroke), hypertension secondary to renal artery involvement, or aortic regurgitation caused by aortitis.
The thoracic aorta itself may be involved in the inflammatory process and develop either aneurysms or stenoses. The diagnosis is confirmed by CTA or MRA, which show stenosis and dilation of the aorta, its branches, or both. Thickening of the aortic wall detected by MRI or ultrasonography can precede the angiographic changes.
Treatment of TA is based principally on corticosteroids. The great majority of patients respond to prednisone, which is effective for the systemic symptoms and can impede further progression of the vasculitis. The usual starting dose is approximately 1 mg/kg of body weight per day. Because of the significant side effects of long-term high dose prednisone use, the high starting dose is tapered over several weeks to a dose that is more tolerable for the patient, with respect to the decrease of C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). For life-long treatment, methotrexate, azathioprine, and even cyclophosphamide are sometimes used in addition to prednisone.
There are few data in the literature to identify TA patients who require operation. Evidence for surgical or endovascular repair of thoracic aortic disease in patients with TA is extremely limited. It seems acceptable to maintain the same indications as in non-inflammatory disorders, based on the risk of rupture related to aneurysm dimension, and the presence of secondary organ vascular insufficiency.
In an 8 year study including 11 patients with TA (n = 3), GCA (n = 2), and MFS (n = 6), endovascular repair of complicated aortic aneurysms proved safe and feasible.246 However long-term durability in this younger group of patients who have an ongoing risk of arterial degeneration remains to be determined.
3.5.2 Giant cell arteritis
Giant cell arteritis (GCA), also known as temporal arteritis or cranial arteritis,247 is a systemic, inflammatory, vascular syndrome that affects the aorta and its secondary and tertiary branches.
Although arteritis is a basis for aneurysms, dissections, and stenotic lesions of the aorta and its major branches, patients with GCA experienced similar mortality rates to the general population of similar age and gender.248
The aetiology of GCA is unknown, but the pathogenesis is similar to TA and involves a chronic inflammatory process, which releases several cytokines, including T-lymphocyte products interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin (IL)-2. The T-cell clonal expansion suggests a specific antigenic response, which is still unclear (viral, bacterial, or other). Concentric intimal hyperplasia is an important underlying pathologic lesion in GCA.249
Clinical presentation varies from fever of unknown origin to constitutional symptoms. Arterial lesions may be widespread and the variable expression of GCA can be analyzed according to the anatomical pattern of the arteries affected. Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) and GCA may represent two parts of a single disease spectrum, with GCA at the more severe end. The two processes share certain constitutional symptoms, including fatigue, weight loss, and fever.
The following are criteria for GCA defined by the American College of Rheumatology in 1990247: 1) age 50 years or older; 2) new onset localised headache; 3) temporal artery tenderness or decreased temporal artery pulse; 4) ESR of at least 50 mm/h; and 5) abnormal arterial biopsy specimen characterized by mononuclear infiltration or granulomatous inflammation. The presence of at least three criteria yields a diagnostic sensitivity of 93.5% and specificity of 91.2% when compared with patients who were clinically classified as having the disease. In the case of localisation of disease to the temporal artery, biopsy is diagnostic in the majority of cases, although its sensitivity declines with the initiation of steroid therapy.250
A population based study over 50 years in patients with GCA revealed a 31% cumulative frequency of large artery complications, including aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection in 18%, and/or large artery stenosis in 11%.251 Presence of thoracic aortic dissection was associated with markedly increased mortality (median survival of only 1.6 years after diagnosis of GCA).252
A comparative study suggested that a steroid regimen, starting with 30–40 mg/day and tapering to 10 mg/day within 6 months and to 5–7.5 mg/day within 1 year, is effective and better tolerated in the patient population, than the two higher dose regimens (40–60 or >60 mg/day).253
In refractory cases, the use of immunosuppressants, such as methotrexate (15–25 mg/week) or azathioprine (2 mg/kg/day), as potentially steroid-sparing disease controlling drugs, has been considered and has shown conflicting results.254 The newer tumour necrosis factor antagonists are being evaluated in clinical trials, but initial studies of infliximab did not show promising results.254 Encouraging results have been reported from the use of low dose aspirin for prevention of visual loss and stroke in patients with GCA.255
Indications for surgical or endovascular repair in patients with GCA are similar to non-inflammatory disorders, and the decision in each patient is based on the risk of rupture related to aneurysm dimension, and the presence of secondary organ vascular insufficiency related to fibrotic stenosis.
3.5.3 Behçet disease
This syndrome carries the name of the Turkish dermatologist Hulusi Behçet, who, in 1937, described a syndrome of recurrent aphthous ulcers, genital ulcers, and uveitis.256 Vascular manifestations may vary and depend on the type and location of the vessel involved. Any large or small artery, vein, or organ may be involved in an unpredictable combination. The most common vascular complaints are secondary to venous thrombosis, often of the superficial veins.
Surgical and endovascular repair of aneurysm in Behçet disease has been described as feasible. After surgical repair, a high recurrence rate of anastomotic false aneurysm has also been described, caused by the friability of the diseased arteries. Moreover, any surgery may exacerbate Behçet disease, so patients must be prescribed immunosuppressive therapy before and after the surgical intervention.257 Because pseudoaneurysms may develop at arterial puncture sites and veins may be quickly thrombosed after injection of contrast material, angiography and venography should be avoided whenever possible.258
3.5.4 Other inflammatory aortitides
Other chronic diseases with potential inflammatory involvement of the thoracic aorta include rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, Cogan syndrome, Kawasaki disease, ankylosing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Wegener's granulomatosis.259 Some types of aortitides remain idiopathic.
Cardiovascular involvement in these patients is variable, consisting of aortic valve regurgitation, aneurysm formation, dissection or stenosis of the aorta or its initial branches. Localisation of the inflammatory disease at the level of the aortic root with consequent aortic valve regurgitation is the most common cardiovascular complication in these patients. The involvement of the DTA is extremely rare but potentially more prone to rapid growth and rupture.260 In particular, systemic lupus erythematosus has been suggested as possibly associated with thoracic AD, especially in patients with persisting inflammation while on chronic steroid therapy.260
Figure undfig25
3.6 Coarctation of the thoracic aorta in adults
3.6.1 Definition and diagnosis
Aortic coarctation is a congenital defect characterized by stricture of the aortic lumen typically located at the region of the ligamentum arteriosum. This narrowing is usually localised, but may involve other segments of the aorta such as the arch and, less often, the abdominal aorta. There is significant variation in the degree of stenosis, extent of disease, and clinical manifestations. Generally, an extensive collateral circulation is present in adults.
Men are more often affected (2:1).261 Clinical manifestations include upper limb hypertension, weak and delayed femoral pulses, and lower limb claudication. A thoracic bruit may be present. In advanced cases, heart failure or intracranial haemorrhage commonly develop. When the aortic gradient is less pronounced or collaterals are well developed, symptoms may be absent or mild. Other cardiovascular abnormalities include ventricular septal defects, bicuspid aortic valve, sub-aortic stenosis, aortic medial disease, aortic arch hypoplasia, patent ductus arteriosus, and intracranial aneurysms.262 Adult patients most commonly present with discrete forms of the disease, which may remain occult during childhood and have no association with congenital cardiac abnormalities, or present with recurrence after intervention. There are currently no data on the exact incidence of coarctation manifesting in adulthood.
Both CTA and MRI provide anatomical evidence of coarctation and are the investigations of choice for definitive diagnosis. The aortic gradient may be directly measured by catheterisation, or indirectly estimated using Doppler echocardiography or cardiovascular MR.263
While TTE is usually diagnostic in children, it is often inconclusive in adults. However, TOE is the method of choice to evaluate cardiac sequelae such as ventricular hypertrophy and left ventricular dysfunction, and association with congenital cardiac abnormalities. CTA is a good alternative to MRA, despite absence of functional information. Diagnostic DSA and invasive gradient measurements can be reserved for cases where non-invasive methods fail to provide the necessary information for decision making.
Figure undfig26
3.6.2 Management
Without treatment, mortality is 25% at age 20, 50% at 32, and 75% at 46.264 Most patients die as a result of heart failure, acute aortic syndromes, premature CAD, or complications associated with valvular or cerebral disease.264
After intervention, hypertension resolves in two thirds of patients and the majority of them will benefit from improved ventricular function, reduced ventricular mass and improved ascending aortic distensibility.265 Intervention should be balanced between the anticipated benefits and the patient's life expectancy, surgical risk and comorbidities. In adults the pathological changes resulting from aortic coarctation may no longer be reversible.265,266
3.6.2.1 Indications for repair
Treatment is indicated for symptomatic patients and should be considered for asymptomatic patients with a trans-coarctation gradient >20 mm Hg or persistent upper limb hypertension (systolic pressure >140 mm Hg or diastolic pressure >90 mm Hg). These thresholds are based on expert opinion only, but are supported by clinical evidence suggesting that intervention before large gradients are present may confer a higher chance of reversing left ventricular dysfunction and preventing irreversible loss of aortic wall compliance.265,266 There are two potential invasive treatment strategies, open and endovascular surgery; however, given the rarity of patients requiring invasive treatment, there are no randomized trials comparing these two options. Case series and non-randomized studies suggest marginally increased peri-operative morbidity rates with OR, and greater recurrence rates after endovascular repair.265–267 Regardless of treatment strategy, centralisation of treatment into expert centres should be considered.
Figure undfig27
3.6.2.2 Open repair
OR is the classical method of treatment for aortic coarctation. The most common techniques include resection and end to end anastomosis, or an aortic interposition graft. Alternative techniques have been proposed, such as patch or subclavian flap aortoplasty, or ascending to descending aortic bypass with or without valve replacement, but are generally only performed in expert centres.267 Operative mortality after OR is generally very low (<1%). Complications of OR include rebound hypertension, phrenic and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, recurrence of coarctation, and aneurysm or pseudo-aneurysm formation at the patch site. Rarely, paraplegia and arm claudication (only if a subclavian flap is used) may occur.267
3.6.2.3 Endovascular repair
Anatomical suitability, with a combination of good access vessels, and a short and crossable lesion, is a necessary requirement for endovascular repair. Operative mortality following endovascular repair is very low (<1%). Rarely, aortic rupture (1–2% after simple balloon dilatation), retrograde or antegrade dissection (<1%), stroke, or access problems may occur. Such data make endovascular repair a valid alternative to OR in native coarctations. Late complications of endovascular repair include re-coarctation, which occurs more often compared to OR and aneurysm formation (0–12% after simple balloon dilatation).266–268 In adults, stent placement appears to reduce late complications (particularly aneurysm formation) and recurrence.267 Although there is no current evidence to justify preferential use of covered, straight, or tapered stents, these should be readily available to expeditiously treat aortic rupture following angioplasty.268 Provided anatomical suitability, an endovascular-first approach may be beneficial for the treatment of re-coarctation.269
Figure undfig28
3.7 Miscellanea
Genetic, congenital, and neoplastic pathologies can involve the DTA.
3.7.1 Genetic syndromes
3.7.1.1 Marfan syndrome
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a heritable connective tissue disorder. A mutation of the fibrillin-1 (FBN-1) gene on chromosome 15 has been found in patients with MFS.
Estimates indicate that approximately 1 in 3,000–5,000 individuals have MFS.270 The mutation is inherited as a dominant trait, so each parent with the condition has a 50% risk of passing the genetic defect on to any child. Around one in four patients has no family history, and the syndrome is the result of a spontaneous mutation.
Recently a second type of the disorder (MFS type 2, MFS2) has been identified.271 These mutations are in the gene encoding transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 (TGFβ R2), which has already been reported in LDS.272
A diagnosis of MFS can be established by clinical evaluation alone in the majority of cases. In 1998, the Ghent criteria specified the characteristics of the phenotype and genotype that can be assessed through history, physical examination, imaging, and molecular genetic testing.270 More recently, an international expert panel has established a revised nosology, which puts more weight on aortic root aneurysm (or dissection) and ectopia lentis. Then, in the absence of a family history, the diagnosis of MFS can be made in the case of aortic root enlargement and the presence of ectopia lentis; in the case of aortic root enlargement and the presence of 7 or more points of a systemic score; and in the case of aortic root enlargement and a probably causal FBN1 mutation. Finally, the occurrence of ectopia lentis together with an FBN1 mutation known to be associated with aortic dilatation is also sufficient to make the diagnosis. Together with a family history, ectopia lentis or aortic root enlargement or a systemic score ≥7 are sufficient to make the diagnosis in adults.270
The sensitivity of molecular genetic testing is substantial yet imperfect for unidentified reasons. It may be justified by atypical location or character of FBN1 pathogenic variants in some individuals or to locus heterogeneity.273
MFS has a range of expressions, from mild to severe. The most serious complications are defects of the heart valves and aorta. The most severe cardiovascular complication is acute type A aortic dissection, but type B dissection is also common. AAA is rare.
TTE measurement of the aortic root is very important for the diagnosis and follow up of aortic complications in patients with MFS.274 Generalized aortic root dilatation is a potent marker of an increased risk of subsequent aortic complications in MFS, while dilatation limited to the sinuses of Valsalva without including the aortic arch has a less malignant prognosis. After diagnosis of aortic root/ascending aortic dilatation is made, regular two dimensional TTE is recommended at 6 months and then annually if no further progression of the disease is demonstrated.
Some studies have shown that prophylactic beta-adrenergic blockade is effective in slowing the rate of aortic dilatation and reducing the development of aortic complications in some patients with MFS.270 Some randomized studies revealed that treatment with an angiotensin II receptor blocker may decrease aortic diameters in adult patients with MFS.275 However, more recent data did not show any advantages for angiotensin II receptor blockers in comparison with atenolol among children and young adults with MFS and large aortic root dilatation. A significant decrease in the degree of aortic root dilatation, relative to body surface area, was observed with both treatments.81,82
It is now essential to await results of ongoing large, collaborative, randomized controlled trials276 with clinical end points to assess the novel medical treatments in MFS.
Determination of the size threshold in MFS for surgical repair of thoracic aneurysm is not easy. Surgery is generally recommended for a dilatation ≥50 mm, which is a lower threshold in comparison with other patients with thoracic aortic dilatation.54,274 Other factors that may significantly influence timing of aortic surgery include: 1) rate of growth >2 mm per year; 2) presence of significant aortic regurgitation; and 3) family history of dissection, especially if dissection occurred at aortic diameter ≤50 mm. In cases with borderline indication (diameter ≥45 mm), a well defined increase in aortic diameter >3 mm/year (on repeated measurements using the same imaging technique, measured at the same aortic level with side by side comparison and confirmed by another technique) may be an indication for surgical treatment.
Surgery to the aortic root and thoracic and thoraco-abdominal aorta has resulted in significantly prolonged life expectancy in many patients. The evidence for thoracic endovascular repair in MFS is much more limited, with only small series and registry or case reports including a heterogeneous group of patients with only short-term follow up.193 More recently, particularly in patients with an increased surgical risk because of redo sternotomy or thoracotomy, a gradual move to endovascular repair has been observed, but this approach cannot be recommended for routine use in patients with MFS.
Women with MFS are at high risk of aortic dissection in pregnancy even in the absence of pre-conception aortic root/ascending aorta dilatation. Although women with aortic root dilatation of <40 mm usually tolerate pregnancy well, with good maternal and foetal outcomes, they should be advised regarding the risk of pregnancy to both mother and foetus. Patients who have aortic root dilatation >40 mm are recommended to avoid pregnancy.277
3.7.1.2 Loeys-Dietz syndrome
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is an autosomal dominant genetic syndrome caused by mutations in the genes encoding transforming growth factor beta receptor 1 (TGFβ R1) or 2 (TGFβ R2).278 Given that this syndrome was only recently described, its incidence is currently unknown. Four main characteristics are commonly seen in individuals with LDS: 1) arterial tortuosity (twisting or spiralled arteries), most often occurring in the vessels of the neck; 2) hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes); 3) bifid (split) or broad uvula; and 4) aneurysms (although most often observed in the aortic root leading to AD, can also be found in other arteries throughout the body).
Cardiovascular involvement in LDS has been reported as very aggressive with aneurysm formation and dissection/rupture at a young age. Aortic root aneurysms are common and often lead to AD. Aneurysms of the ascending or DTA are less often seen and are seldom isolated. In the initial clinical series,279 mean age at first dissection was 26 years, dissection occurred at aortic diameters as small as 39 mm and the median age of death was 37 years.
Currently suggested criteria for elective intervention for asymptomatic aneurysms in adults with LDS include an aortic diameter >40 mm for the aortic root and abdominal aorta,280 >50 mm for the DTA, and/or rapid expansion (>5 mm/year) regardless of location. Considering that dissection has been reported in aneurysms <40 mm in diameter, even these criteria might not eliminate the risk of dissection or death, and earlier interventions might be indicated, depending on family history or an evaluation of the risks and benefits of surgery. A strategy of early and aggressive surgical intervention seems to be justified, especially given the typically young age of these patients, the generalized tolerance of surgery, and the rarity of complications related to tissue fragility.281 A definite threshold diameter for intervention in cases of TAA has not been established and the matter requires further investigation with larger series.
3.7.1.3 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of disorders that share common features including easy bruising, joint hypermobility, skin hyperelasticity or laxity, and weakness of tissues, including arteries.
In the vascular type of EDS (formerly called type IV), spontaneous rupture of arteries and bowel are serious manifestations that can lead to death. It is primarily inherited as an autosomal dominant genetic disorder. Arterial rupture may be preceded by aneurysm formation, arteriovenous fistulae, or dissection but may also occur spontaneously. The anatomic locations of arterial rupture are the thorax and abdomen (50%), head and neck (25%), and extremities (25%). Such complications are dramatic and often unexpected, presenting as sudden death, stroke and its neurological sequelae, acute abdomen, retroperitoneal bleeding, and/or shock. The average age for the first major arterial or gastrointestinal complication is 23 years, and the life expectancy is only 48 years.282
Surveillance may include periodic arterial screening by MRI or computed tomographic imaging with or without contrast. A conservative approach is usually recommended for vascular type of EDS; however, urgent surgery may be required to treat potentially fatal complications.
From a pharmacological point of view, a recent multicentre, randomized and blinded study suggested that celiprolol, a β(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist with a β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist action, prevents dissections and arterial ruptures in patients with vascular EDS.283
A number of patients develop post-operative anastomotic pseudoaneurysms despite utilisation of a number of precautions including delicate and atraumatic handling of tissues, and sewing of anastomoses with pledgeted sutures.284
At present, knowledge of the use of stents to treat vascular complications of EDS is insufficient. Novel approaches using endovascular repair with coil embolisation have also been attempted, with good results in selected cases of ruptured pseudoaneurysms, visceral aneurysms, and carotid-cavernous fistulas. However, because of the risk of arterial rupture following arterial puncture, indications for endovascular aortic repair remain to be determined.285
Maternal mortality during pregnancy in the vascular type of EDS is around 12%, because of uterine or vascular rupture, particularly during the last trimester. To minimise the risks related to contractions and achieve haemostasis, a Caesarean section should be carried out before the onset of labour.286
3.7.1.4 Turner syndrome
Turner syndrome (TS) is a genetic disorder of female development with cardinal features of short stature and congenital cardiovascular defects. It is a chromosomal condition in which all or part of one of the sex chromosomes is absent. Analysis of cytogenetic screening studies indicates that TS occurs in ∼1/200 conceptions but only 1/2000 live female births, with congenital cardiovascular defects leading to a high rate of foetal death.287
An epidemiological study of Danish and Swedish records found the median age of onset of AD or rupture in TS to be 35 years, with a projected annual incidence of approximately 15 cases/100,000 for individuals <20 years of age, 73–78 cases/100,000 for women 20–40 years old, and ∼50/100,000 for older women with TS. Of note, the incidence of AD in the general Danish population was 6/100,000 in the same study.287
Patients who develop AD have aortic valve disease and/or coarctation in 10–25% of cases. While apparently all TS patients younger than 20 years have some structural congenital heart disease, about 10% of adults with TS that have died from aortic dissection have no evidence of major structural defects on autopsy.288
Evidence for regular screening for aortic disease in women with TS is not available. A baseline cardiovascular evaluation should be obtained at the time of diagnosis and includes MRI in addition to echocardiography. These studies should be repeated every 5–10 years, or earlier if clinically indicated by pregnancy or by known risk factors for AD such as hypertension, bicuspid aortic valve, or coarctation.288
A recent study investigating the effect of supra-physiological doses of growth hormone to increase adult height in patients with TS, which may have direct effects on the cardiovascular system, revealed that this regimen neither seems to affect ascending or DTA diameter beyond the increase related to the larger body size nor does it disproportionately affect cardiac dimensions.289
3.7.1.5 Familial thoracic aortic disease
A family pattern of transmission of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection has been described recently.62 Studies have confirmed the genetic nature of DTAAs in a large population of affected patients and families, with an inherited pattern for DTAA present in up to 21.5% of non-Marfan patients. Patterns of inheritance and phenotypic features among family clusters have also been identified.62 These statistics underestimate the true prevalence of familial aneurysm disease because many family members may harbour unknown aneurysms. For this reason it is quite likely that the true rate of inheritance of DTAA is even higher than 20%.
Although certain chromosomal loci have been identified, complete identification of the genes leading to this familial non-syndromic form of DTAA is still in the early phase of investigation.290 Some families have not mapped to either of these loci suggesting that additional loci may contribute to the constellation of genes responsible for aneurysmal predisposition. The predominant mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant, with reduced gene penetrance in women. Variable expressivity and multiple anatomic locations of familial arterial aneurysms have been observed.
Patients with familial DTAA are significantly younger at the time of presentation than patients with sporadic TAAA, but not as young as patients with MFS. The aortic growth rate has been reported to be 2.1 mm/year, which is faster when compared with sporadic DTAA patient growth (1.6 mm/year), and MFS (1 mm/year).
The aggressive clinical course of this disease underscores the importance of appropriate screening in extended relatives of patients with familial non-syndromic DTAA. Secondary prevention strategies employed for patients with MFS including angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor administration, should also be evaluated for patients with early onset familial DTAA.
All first degree relatives of patients considered to be part of a familial aneurysm disorder may be considered for screening imaging to evaluate for DTA and AAA at the age of 50, with repeat surveillance at regular intervals (e.g. 2–3 years).
Figure undfig29
3.7.2 Aortic tumours
Primary tumours of the aorta are rare and are usually malignant. The diagnosis may be complicated as aortic tumours can clinically mimic heterogeneous conditions such as aneurysm, dissection, aortic coarctation, floating thrombus, intrathoracic, abdominal or retroperitoneal malignancies, and atherosclerotic peripheral vascular disease. The diagnosis is most often made after surgery or at autopsy. Most of the cases described in the literature are sarcomas and malignant fibrous histiocytomas.291 Aortic angiosarcomas occur more often in the DTA.
A clinico-pathological classification of aortic tumours categorizes the lesions as intimal or mural (obstructive and non-obstructive).292 Intraluminal tumours often give rise to thromboembolism, whereas those arising from the media and adventitia form aggressive mass lesions, which may have intra- and extra-luminal extension. Clinical presentation and imaging findings are often non-specific. Symptoms are typically the result of tumour embolisation, local mass effect, or luminal obstruction causing claudication or secondary hypertension in the case of renal stenosis.292
Making a diagnosis is challenging. Aortic sarcomas can easily be confused with aneurysmal disease or atherosclerotic aorto-iliac occlusive disease. The diagnosis may be based on a high index of suspicion and is generally confirmed by fluorodeoxyglucose/positron emission tomography/CT (FDG PET/CT), which shows increased uptake at the location of the tumour,293 and biopsy.
Evidence regarding the therapeutic management of aortic tumours shows poor outcomes. Survival in patients with malignant tumours has been very poor, whether or not they tolerate surgical resection. Five year survival is reported at 12% after surgical intervention, and only 8% after conservative treatment.294
Endovascular repair is not recommended. Stent grafts do not preclude the growth and metastatic potential of neoplastic lesions despite angiographic exclusion.295 Endovascular exclusion can be offered only for compassionate use when repetitive tumour embolic events occur.
3.7.3 Floating thrombus
Floating thrombus is defined as the presence of mobile thrombus in the DTA that may be a potential source of life threatening peripheral arterial emboli to visceral organs or the lower limbs. This condition may be related to a previously injured aortic wall (dissection, atherosclerosis, or trauma).
A floating thrombus in a healthy thoracic aorta is a rare event, and is commonly associated with an underlying thrombophilia. In many cases the pathophysiology/aetiology remains unknown.
Prompt diagnosis and treatment are necessary to avoid severe complications. The diagnosis of floating thoracic aortic thrombus is usually made after debilitating embolic events. TOE represents the non-invasive study of choice to first exclude a cardioembolic source, while also providing a good view of the distal arch and DTA. CTA and MRA can provide additional and more detailed information.296,297
The treatment strategy for this disease remains controversial and is determined by the location and extension of the thrombus, presence of complications, the patient's comorbidities, and the physician's preferences. Options include anticoagulant therapy, aspiration thrombectomy, surgical thrombectomy, or endovascular repair by covered stent deployment.296
If anticoagulation is selected, a size reduction of thrombus should be observed in a short time and heparin treatment must be maintained or switched to oral anticoagulation until the thrombus is completely dissolved. When no reduction in thrombus size is observed, or if the thrombus appears mobile within the aortic lumen, a more aggressive treatment strategy should be recommended. The benefits of an OR approach with thoracic aortic thrombectomy are debatable, as the operative risk is disproportionally high relative to the potential benefit. Moreover, the risk of a medical treatment failure leading to repeated embolism is undetermined, with a few reports demonstrating complete thrombus dissolution with anticoagulation alone.297 On the other hand, early intervention with thoracic aortic thrombectomy has been shown to prevent fatal recurrent embolic events.296
Less invasive surgical approaches have been proposed, including TOE guided trans-aortic and trans-femoral balloon thrombectomy, percutaneous catheter thrombo-aspiration, and TOE guided thrombus exclusion using endovascular covered stents.298 Endovascular exclusion of the thrombus from the systemic circulation by stent graft deployment is certainly an attractive approach in high risk surgical patients with favourable anatomy, although the possibility of thrombus fragmentation and dislodgement by catheter manipulation should also be considered.
Follow up must include long-term anticoagulant therapy and routine surveillance using TOE or CTA or MRI until all thrombus has disappeared, as the long-term outcome remains uncertain.
4 Surveillance
To prevent complications and ascertain therapeutic efficacy, it is suggested that all patients diagnosed with or treated for DTA disease should undergo a strict programme of systematic surveillance. Successful management and outcomes are dependent not only on the initial treatment, but also on adequate follow up and early diagnosis of complications. Although the therapeutic options differ among the various DTA diseases, patient surveillance follows a similar protocol (Fig. 3A and 3B, Table 3). These surveillance intervals are based on several reported experiences, as no definitive evidence exists.44,65,85,88,107,108,129,168,173,299
All patients with DTA disease require aggressive management of hypertension, secondary prevention of cardiovascular diseases, and close follow up to monitor the evolution of the diseased aorta. In particular, conservatively treated patients are prone to develop progression of disease195 and OR patients can develop anastomotic pseudoaneurysm, new para-anastomotic aneurysms, graft infection or graft occlusion.299 TEVAR may result in stent graft related complications such as endoleak, stent graft migration, or stent graft collapse.106,107 The primary importance of the surveillance protocols is to prevent these complications.
CTA is the modality most often used for follow up in DTA disease. ECG-gated CTAs have greatly improved imaging quality by eliminating pulsation artefacts. This imaging modality may identify subtle aortic characteristics such as the primary intimal tear in TBAD and ulcerative plaques in PAU (see also Section 2.3.5.). An excellent assessment of the vessel wall and aortic lumen, including the surrounding anatomy is derived from multiplanar imaging, three dimensional reconstruction and centre lumen line reconstruction.20,21
However, cumulative lifetime radiation exposure caused by multiple CTA examinations must be taken into account during planning of follow up. In addition, iodinated intravenous contrast agents are associated with nephrotoxic effects. MRI can be used to avoid radiation and iodinated contrast media.300 MRI compatible stent grafts are a prerequisite, as the presence of stainless steel implants causes artefacts. In patients treated with thoracic aortic endografts, conventional chest X-rays can show stent graft migration, collapse, or fracture. This is especially true regarding follow up after TAI repair. Given the generally young age of this subgroup of patients, concerns arise with regard to the cumulative radiation and iodinated contrast exposure required for long-term follow up. For these reasons, MRA may also be used for surveillance when magnetic resonance compatible stent grafts are employed.166 Therefore, it seems reasonable to adopt a combination of a multi-view chest X-rays and MRA instead of CTA for long-term imaging of these patients.151
In patients with inflammatory disease, infectious/inflammatory activity can be visualized and followed using nuclear imaging with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET), or gallium 67 (67GA).301 In suspected aortic graft infection, the diagnostic performance of FDG-PET is superior to that of CTA and is recommended in certain situations.301 Because these modalities do not provide any morphological characteristics of the aorta, they need to be combined with CTA or MRI. Additional oesophagoscopy and bronchoscopy may be required in evaluation of aorto-bronchial and/or aorto-oesophageal fistulae.
In patients with ATBAD managed medically, progressive aneurysmal dilatation can develop over time.189 This dilatation may eventually lead to rupture and sudden death during the chronic phase.173 In ATBAD, some predictors of aortic growth, like the entry tear size and partial FL thrombosis, are now identified.168,174 Patients with chronic TBAD may develop progression of the initial dissection or a secondary aortic dissection event like intramural haematoma. In addition, in ATBAD patients treated with TEVAR, distal perfusion of the FL is often observed, and its role remains poorly understood.191
Therefore, routine surveillance should consist of physical examination, blood pressure control, and echocardiography, and mainly be done with MRA or CTA, based on patient characteristics (see also Table 3).
The natural history of both PAU and IMH is unclear and patients with these conditions should have a close surveillance protocol. Morphological changes can develop over time,7,12,121 and patients with IMH and PAU should have the same surveillance programme as those with AD.
In patients with DTAAs or TAAAs, surveillance after initial detection is similar to that for other DTA diseases (Table 3). In this setting, the level of evidence remains low, despite the higher incidence of aneurysms and experience reported in the literature. In conservatively managed patients, the mean aortic growth is about 1 mm/year, and is more prominent in the DTA in which growth has been reported to be 1.9 mm/year.65 Other factors influencing aortic growth are initial diameter and the presence of connective tissue disorders. Surveillance of patients diagnosed with aneurysms will consist of imaging studies after 6 and 12 months, and yearly thereafter. For small and stable aneurysms, the surveillance interval can be reduced to every 2–3 years (Table 5).
 	Modalities	Interval	Indications for closer follow up or potential intervention
ATBAD	CT or MRI	3 m, 6 m, yearly
In stable condition after 3 years follow up, the interval can be extended to 2–3 years	Aortic growth >5 mm/year
Aortic diameter >50 mm
IMH	CT or MRI	3 m, 6 m, yearly
In stable condition after 3 years follow up, the interval can be extended to 2–3 years	Extension of IMH
Presence of concomitant PAU
Aortic growth >5 mm/year
Aortic diameter >50 mm
PAU	CT or MRI	3 m, 6 m, yearly
In stable condition after 3 years follow up, the interval can be extended to 2–3 years	 
Thoracic aortic aneurysm	CT or MRI	6 m, 12 m, yearly
In stable condition after 3 years follow up, the interval can be extended to 2–3 years	Aortic growth >5 mm/year
Aortic diameter >50 mm
Thoraco-abdominal aneurysm	CT or MRI	6 m, 12 m, yearly
In stable condition after 3 years follow up, the interval can be extended to 2–3 years	Aortic growth >5 mm/year
Aortic diameter >55 mm
Inflammatory disease	CT or MRI, combined with PET
Blood tests: white cell count, CRP	3 m, 6 m, yearly	 
Thoracic coarctation	CT or MRI	On clinical indication	 
Aortic disease with connective tissue disorders	CT or MRI	3 m, 6 m, yearly	Aortic diameter >45 mm
Aortic growth >5 mm/year
Table 5
Suggested disease specific follow up protocol for conservative management.

    Open table in a new tab

The surveillance of patients with thoracic aortic coarctation should include an annual clinical evaluation (blood pressure in upper and lower limbs) by the cardiologist combined with echocardiography and additional aortic imaging when indicated. Although uncommon, pregnant patients with coarctation should be monitored carefully to prevent complications. After coarctation repair, by surgery, TEVAR, or balloon angioplasty, regular follow up examination is mandatory. Long-term complications may occur, especially when the intervention has been performed in neonates. It is imperative to minimise radiation, as the patient population can be relatively young. MRI, which is the most cost effective imaging modality, should be adopted routinely as the follow up screening test of choice.302 More recently, a non-invasive method based on computational fluid dynamics and MR imaging, has been proposed to estimate the pre- and post-operative haemodynamics for both native and recurrent coarctation patients.303
In all patients with DTA diseases managed by OR, follow up is similar (see Fig. 4). After a 6 month post-operative CT scan, patients should have yearly CTA or MRI examinations. The interval between scans may be lengthened after 3 years of complication-free follow up.
Figure 4 Suggested surveillance algorithm after open repair.
TEVAR requires more intensive surveillance compared with open treatment, because of potential stent graft related complications such as endoleak, migration, and collapse. Detection of type I and III endoleaks requires prompt intervention, as does stent graft migration or collapse. Type II and IV endoleaks may be followed by serial CTA/MRI187,304 (see Fig. 5).
Figure undfig30
Figure 5 Suggested surveillance algorithm after TEVAR. *Endoleak types: type I, direct flow between endograft and aortic wall in the proximal (type Ia) or distal sealing zone (type Ib); type II, blood flow in the aneurysm sac, originating from side branches; type III, direct flow coming from overlapped segments or through a defect of the stent graft fabric; type IV, blood flow into the aneurysm sac because of the porosity of the graft fabric. ** Other complications should be managed accordingly.
5 Gaps in the Evidence
Robust evidence is still needed in many aspects of the management of DTA pathologies. In numerous clinical scenarios, adequate trials are lacking. In addition, because of continuous technical innovation in endovascular repair, clinical practice tends to follow technical developments without robust evidence from randomized trials. Randomized studies often yield conflicting results because of technical evolution and growth in the participants' experience. These overall guidelines include this section to identify the most relevant gaps in the evidence.
5.1 General aspects
5.1.1.
The value of glucocorticosteroids, mannitol, and intrathecal techniques to prevent spinal cord ischaemia needs clinical data to be definitively adopted or rejected for clinical practice during OR of DTA.
5.1.2.
The value of MEP and SSEP in patients treated with TEVAR is not clearly supported by clinical data.
5.1.3.
The optimal brain protection strategy in patients requiring open or endovascular repair for thoracic aortic disease needs to be defined.
5.2 Acute type B dissection
5.2.1.
TEVAR indications for uncomplicated ATBAD need to be elucidated by prospective and randomized studies.
5.2.2.
It would be useful to define early unfavourable clinical and imaging signs and biomarkers as predictive factors to identify patients who can benefit the most from thoracic endografting.
5.3 Thoracic aortic rupture
5.3.1.
There is no level A or B evidence for the best method of repair of ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms. A few non-consecutive studies report endovascular techniques and compare these with earlier reports using OR (level C). Intuitively, sealing an anatomically suitable ruptured thoracic aneurysm via a femoral approach with a stent graft without opening the chest must put the patient at lower risk, and there will therefore never be a randomized trial to compare the two modalities. In addition, the number of affected patients is too small to support a randomized trial and patients are very difficult to recruit.
5.4 Blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury
5.4.1.
A randomized clinical trial is not justified to elucidate the benefit of TEVAR over OR in the acute setting.
5.4.2.
No evidence supports the choice between open and endovascular repair for chronic post-traumatic pseudoaneurysms.
5.4.3.
More information about the natural history of chronic post-traumatic pseudoaneurysms is needed. No clear criteria for repair have been described. The protective role of severe calcification remains uncertain.
5.4.4.
A follow up programme for patients who have been treated by TEVAR for TAI needs to be established.
5.5 Chronic type B dissection
5.5.1.
The advent of endovascular repair suggests that TBAD may require an additional classification with respect to chronicity. A sub-category of sub-acute dissection may reflect the ability of the aorta to remodel between 2 and 12 weeks after the initial dissection. Further evidence of aortic remodelling after TEVAR and the natural history of sub-acute dissection is required.
5.5.2.
There is a lack of natural history data relating to CTBAD in the era of modern medical therapy. Data are required to define the incidence of aortic related events, aortic growth rates, and FL thrombosis rates. These data may inform the threshold and indications for interventional therapy. At present there are no conclusive data to establish diameter thresholds for repair of TBAD.
5.5.3.
The natural history of CTBAD may be related to morphological features that could be defined with newer imaging techniques such as 4D MRA. Research is awaited.
5.5.4.
There is a lack of distinct evidence regarding early outcomes following repair of CTBAD – either open or endovascular. At present most data relate to a mixture of thoracic pathologies and more homogenous data series are required. There are only a few series detailing the ability of OR to prevent aortic related death in the mid- and long-term. There are very few series detailing the ability of TEVAR to prevent aortic related death in the mid- and long-term.
5.6 Descending thoracic aortic aneurysm
5.6.1.
Intervention in DTAA <55 mm may not afford a survival benefit. Outcomes of intervention need to be exceptional to justify repair in the small aneurysm group. The advent of TEVAR justifies a randomized prospective trial for small DTAA to compare early TEVAR and surveillance only.
5.6.2.
Long-term durability of thoracic endografting, especially for DTAA repair, is not well determined. More data are needed from case series and case control studies to elucidate the late complications and re-intervention rate beyond 5 years follow up.
5.7 Thoraco-abdominal aneurysm
5.7.1.
There is no level A or B evidence on the best method of repair for elective TAAA.
5.8 Inflammatory diseases
5.8.1.
A very low level of evidence is available for determining indications for treating inflammatory disease of the thoracic aorta. The same indications are recommended as for elective repair of any thoracic aortic disease, based on the risk of rupture related to aneurysm dimension and the presence of secondary end organ ischaemia. This is level C evidence.
5.8.2.
There is very poor evidence to support any specific follow up regimen after surgical or endovascular repair of cardiovascular disorders in patients with systemic inflammatory diseases receiving steroid therapy.
5.9 Coarctation
5.9.1.
There is no high quality evidence regarding the ideal treatment strategy for native or recurrent coarctation in adults. No randomized trials have compared open with endovascular strategies and such a comparison is impractical because of the rareness of the disease and constant developments in endovascular technology. Further comparative evidence from case control studies and case series is required. Long-term data regarding durability and late complications following endovascular repair are essential.
5.9.2.
Concerning endovascular repair, no high quality evidence supports the routine use of bare or covered stents. A prospective randomized trial could clarify the optimal strategy in patients with native or recurrent coarctation, with attention to the following endpoints: re-stenosis/aneurysm formation at the treatment site, residual hypertension, and progressive left ventricular dysfunction.
5.9.3.
Evidence suggests that persistent hypertension after successful repair is a risk factor for premature coronary and carotid obstructive disease, persistent left ventricular function deterioration and increased risk of aortic and cerebral aneurysm rupture. Persistent hypertension may be multifactorial, with abnormal aortic wall compliance and baroreceptor dysfunction as possible causes. Further research on this topic is necessary to clarify the risk benefit of intervention.
5.10 Miscellanea
5.10.1.
No robust evidence is available to support a threshold diameter for treating patients with genetic syndromes associated with thoracic aneurysm (a threshold of ≥50 mm is suggested, with a threshold <50 mm in cases where the rate of growth is >5 mm per year, or when significant aortic regurgitation or a family history of dissection is present). Unfortunately, the level of evidence for this suggestion cannot be higher than Level C. More and larger series are needed.
5.11 Surveillance
5.11.1.
Surveillance intervals are based on several reported experiences, as no evidence is available. This is particularly evident in patients treated for DTAA, in which the level of evidence remains low despite the higher incidence of aneurysms and increasing experience reported in the literature (see also Section 5.8.2.).
Acknowledgements
The Writing Committee would like to thank F. Bastos Gonçalves (Netherlands), C. Brinster (Spain), E. Civilini (Italy), G. Coppi (Italy), G. de Donato (Italy), G. Maritati (Italy), G. Mestres (Spain), K. Paraskevas (Greece), F. Pecoraro (Switzerland), and JL. Tolenaar (Netherlands) for their contribution on preparing and writing this manuscript.
Appendix Recommended additional references
Document (82.50 KB)
Comments
Commenting Guidelines

To submit a comment for a journal article, please use the space above and note the following:

    We will review submitted comments as soon as possible, striving for within two business days.
    This forum is intended for constructive dialogue. Comments that are commercial or promotional in nature, pertain to specific medical cases, are not relevant to the article for which they have been submitted, or are otherwise inappropriate will not be posted.
    We require that commenters identify themselves with names and affiliations.
    Comments must be in compliance with our Terms & Conditions.
    Comments are not peer-reviewed.

References
1.
European Society of Cardiology. Recommendations for guidelines production. www.escardio.org/static_file/Escardio/Guidelines/about/ESC_Guidelines_for_Guidelines_Update_2012_for_web.pdf.
Google Scholar
2.
Johnston, K.W. ∙ Rutherford, R.B. ∙ Tilson, M.D. ...
Suggested standards for reporting on arterial aneurysms. Subcommittee on Reporting Standards for Arterial Aneurysms, Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting Standards, Society for Vascular Surgery and North American Chapter, International Society for Cardiovascular Surgery
J Vasc Surg. 1991; 13:452-458
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (684)
PubMed
Google Scholar
3.
Kälsch, H. ∙ Lehmann, N. ∙ Möhlenkamp, S. ...
Body-surface adjusted aortic reference diameters for improved identification of patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms: results from the population-based Heinz Nixdorf Recall study
Int J Cardiol. 2013; 163:72-78
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (29)
PubMed
Google Scholar
4.
Clouse, W.D. ∙ Hallet, Jr., J.W. ∙ Shaff, H.V. ...
Acute aortic dissection: population-based incidence compared with degenerative aortic aneurysm rupture
Mayo Clin Proc. 2004; 79:176-180
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
5.
Landenhed, M. ∙ Engstrom, G. ∙ Gottsater, A. ...
Risk profiles for aortic dissection and ruptured or surgically treated aneurysms: a prospective cohort study
J Am Heart Assoc. 2015; 4:e001513
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
6.
Eggebrecht, H. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Neuhauser, M. ...
Endovascular stent graft placement in aortic dissection: a meta-analysis
Eur Heart J. 2006; 27:489-498
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
7.
Evangelista, A. ∙ Mukherjee, D. ∙ Mehta, R.H. ...
Acute intramural hematoma of the aorta: a mystery in evolution
Circulation. 2005; 111:1063-1070
Crossref
Scopus (277)
PubMed
Google Scholar
8.
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Transport_accident_statistics#Main_statistical_findings.
Google Scholar
9.
European Commission. Mobility and transport. Road safety. http://ec.europa.eu/transport/road_safety/specialist/statistics/.
Google Scholar
10.
Johansson, G. ∙ Markström, U. ∙ Swedenborg, J.
Ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms: a study of incidence and mortality rates
J Vasc Surg. 1995; 21:985-988
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (198)
PubMed
Google Scholar
11.
Fowkes, F.G. ∙ Macintyre, C.C. ∙ Ruckley, C.V.
Increasing incidence of aortic aneurysms in England and Wales
BMJ. 1989; 298:33-35
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
12.
Karageorgaki, Z.T. ∙ Bertsias, G.K. ∙ Mavragani, C.P. ...
Takayasu arteritis: epidemiological, clinical, and immunogenetic features in Greece
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2009; 27:S33-S39
PubMed
Google Scholar
13.
Nordborg, E. ∙ Nordborg, C.
Giant cell arteritis: epidemiological clues to its pathogenesis and an update on its treatment
Rheumatology. 2003; 42:413-421
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
14.
Lee, J.L. ∙ Naguwa, S.M. ∙ Cheema, G.S. ...
The geo-epidemiology of temporal (giant cell) arteritis
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2008; 35:88-95
Crossref
Scopus (38)
PubMed
Google Scholar
15.
Idil, A. ∙ Gurler, A. ∙ Boyvat, A. ...
The prevalence of Behcet's disease above the age of 10 years. The results of a pilot study conducted at the Park Primary Health Care Center in Ankara, Turkey
Ophthalmic Epidemiol. 2002; 9:325-331
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
16.
Teo, L.L. ∙ Cannell, T. ∙ Babu-Narayan, S.V. ...
Prevalence of associated cardiovascular abnormalities in 500 patients with aortic coarctation referred for cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging to a tertiary center
Pediatr Cardiol. 2011; 32:1120-1127
Crossref
Scopus (24)
PubMed
Google Scholar
17.
Goldstein, S.A. ∙ Evangelista, A. ∙ Abbara, S. ...
Multimodality imaging of diseases of the thoracic aorta in adults: from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2015; 28:119-182
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
18.
Klompas, M.
Does this patient have an acute thoracic aortic dissection?
J Am Med Assoc. 2002; 287:2262-2272
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
19.
Evangelista, A. ∙ Flachskampf, F.A. ∙ Erbel, R. ...
Echocardiography in aortic diseases: EAE recommendations for clinical practice
Eur J Echocardiogr. 2010; 11:645-658
Crossref
Scopus (159)
PubMed
Google Scholar
20.
Parodi, J. ∙ Berguer, R. ∙ Carrascosa, P. ...
Sources of error in the measurement of aortic diameter in computed tomography scans
J Vasc Surg. 2014; 59:74-79
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
21.
Wicky, S. ∙ Wintermark, M. ∙ Schnyder, P. ...
Imaging of blunt chest trauma
Eur Radiol. 2000; 10:1524-1538
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
22.
Ad-hoc Working Group of ERBP ∙ Fliser, D. ∙ Laville, M. ...
A European Renal Best Practice (ERBP) position statement on the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) clinical practice guidelines on acute kidney injury: part 1: definitions, conservative management and contrast-induced nephropathy
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012; 27:4263-4272
Crossref
Scopus (188)
PubMed
Google Scholar
23.
François, C.J. ∙ Markl, M. ∙ Schiebler, M.L. ...
Four-dimensional, flow-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging of blood flow patterns in thoracic aortic dissections
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013; 145:1359-1366
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (60)
PubMed
Google Scholar
24.
Wang, Y. ∙ Alkasab, T.K. ∙ Narin, O. ...
Incidence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis after adoption of restrictive gadolinium-based contrast agent guidelines
Radiology. 2011; 260:105-111
Crossref
Scopus (87)
PubMed
Google Scholar
25.
Walter, M.A. ∙ Melzer, R.A. ∙ Schindler, C. ...
The value of [18F]FDG-PET in the diagnosis of large-vessel vasculitis and the assessment of activity and extent of disease
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2005; 32:674-681
Crossref
Scopus (229)
PubMed
Google Scholar
26.
Litmanovich, D.E. ∙ Yıldırım, A. ∙ Bankier, A.A.
Insights into imaging of aortitis
Insights Imaging. 2012; 3:545-560
Crossref
Scopus (21)
PubMed
Google Scholar
27.
Huang, B. ∙ Law, M.W. ∙ Khong, P.L.
Whole-body PET/CT scanning: estimation of radiation dose and cancer risk
Radiology. 2009; 251:166-174
Crossref
Scopus (200)
PubMed
Google Scholar
28.
Svensson, L.G. ∙ Crawford, E.S. ∙ Hess, K.R. ...
Experience with 1509 patients undergoing thoracoabdominal aortic operations
J Vasc Surg. 1993; 17:357-368
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (894)
PubMed
Google Scholar
29.
Coselli, J.S. ∙ LeMaire, S.A. ∙ Koksoy, C. ...
Cerebrospinal fluid drainage reduces paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: results of a randomized clinical trial
J Vasc Surg. 2002; 35:631-639
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (369)
PubMed
Google Scholar
30.
Jacobs, M.J. ∙ Mess, W. ∙ Mochtar, B. ...
The value of motor evoked potentials in reducing paraplegia during thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair
J Vasc Surg. 2006; 43:239-246
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (123)
PubMed
Google Scholar
31.
Goldstein, L.J. ∙ Davies, R.R. ∙ Rizzo, J.A. ...
Stroke in surgery of the thoracic aorta: incidence, impact, etiology, and prevention
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001; 122:935-945
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (57)
PubMed
Google Scholar
32.
Galla, J.D. ∙ Ergin, M.A. ∙ Lansman, S.L. ...
Use of somatosensory evoked potentials for thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic resections
Ann Thorac Surg. 1999; 67:1947-1952
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
33.
Guerit, J.M. ∙ Witdoeckt, C. ∙ Verhelst, R. ...
Sensitivity, specificity, and surgical impact of somatosensory evoked potentials in descending aorta surgery
Ann Thorac Surg. 1999; 67:1943-1946
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
34.
de Haan, P. ∙ Kalkman, C.J.
Spinal cord monitoring: somatosensory- and motor-evoked potentials
Anesthesiol Clin North America. 2001; 19:923-945
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
35.
Estrera, A.L. ∙ Miller, 3rd, C.C. ∙ Huynh, T.T. ...
Neurologic outcome after thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Ann Thorac Surg. 2001; 72:1225-1230
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (123)
PubMed
Google Scholar
36.
Nijenhuis, R.J. ∙ Jacobs, M.J. ∙ Schurink, G.W. ...
Comparison of magnetic resonance with computed tomography angiography for preoperative localization of the Adamkiewicz artery in thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm patients
J Vasc Surg. 2007; 45:677-685
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (49)
PubMed
Google Scholar
37.
Khan, S.N. ∙ Stansby, G.
Cerebrospinal fluid drainage for thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;
Art. No.: CD003635. http:dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003635.pub3.
Google Scholar
38.
Lima, B. ∙ Nowicki, E.R. ∙ Blackstone, E.H. ...
Spinal cord protective strategies during descending and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair in the modern era: the role of intrathecal papaverine
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012; 143:945-952
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (33)
PubMed
Google Scholar
39.
Wynn, M.M. ∙ Mell, M.W. ∙ Tefera, G. ...
Complications of spinal fluid drainage in thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a report of 486 patients treated from 1987 to 2008
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:29-34
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (69)
PubMed
Google Scholar
40.
Coselli, J.S.
The use of left heart bypass in the repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: current techniques and results
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003; 15:326-332
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (64)
PubMed
Google Scholar
41.
Kulik, A. ∙ Castner, C.F. ∙ Kouchoukos, N.T.
Outcomes after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair with hypothermic circulatory arrest
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 141:953-960
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (40)
PubMed
Google Scholar
42.
Svensson, L.G. ∙ Khitin, L. ∙ Nadolny, E.M. ...
Systemic temperature and paralysis after thoracoabdominal and descending aortic operations
Arch Surg. 2003; 138:175-179
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
43.
de Haan, P. ∙ Kalkman, C.J. ∙ Jacobs, M.J.
Pharmacologic neuroprotection in experimental spinal cord ischaemia: a systematic review
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2001; 13:3-12
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
44.
Buth, J. ∙ Harris, P.L. ∙ Hobo, R. ...
Neurologic complications associated with endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pathology: incidence and risk factors. a study from the European Collaborators on Stent/Graft Techniques for Aortic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR) registry
J Vasc Surg. 2007; 46:1103-1110
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (343)
PubMed
Google Scholar
45.
Khoynezhad, A. ∙ Donayre, C.E. ∙ Bui, H. ...
Risk factors of neurologic deficit after thoracic aortic endografting
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:S882-S889
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (116)
PubMed
Google Scholar
46.
Amabile, P. ∙ Grisoli, D. ∙ Giorgi, R. ...
Incidence and determinants of spinal cord ischaemia in stent graft repair of the thoracic aorta
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008; 35:455-461
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
47.
Schlösser, F.J. ∙ Verhagen, H.J. ∙ Lin, P.H. ...
TEVAR following prior abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery: increased risk of neurological deficit
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:308-314
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (42)
PubMed
Google Scholar
48.
Maldonado, T.S. ∙ Dexter, D. ∙ Rockman, C.B. ...
Left subclavian artery coverage during thoracic endovascular aortic aneurysm repair does not mandate revascularisation
J Vasc Surg. 2013; 57:116-124
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
49.
Matsumura, J.S. ∙ Lee, W.A. ∙ Mitchell, R.S. ...
The Society for Vascular Surgery Practice Guidelines: management of the left subclavian artery with thoracic endovascular aortic repair
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 50:1155-1158
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (173)
PubMed
Google Scholar
50.
Rizvi, A.Z. ∙ Murad, M.H. ∙ Fairman, R.M. ...
The effect of left subclavian artery coverage on morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing endovascular thoracic aortic interventions: a systematic review and meta-analysis
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 50:1159-1169
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (119)
PubMed
Google Scholar
51.
Vilacosta, I. ∙ Aragoncillo, P. ∙ Cañadas, V. ...
Acute aortic syndrome: a new look at an old conundrum
Heart. 2009; 95:1130-1139
PubMed
Google Scholar
52.
Mackenzie, K.S. ∙ LeGuillan, M.P. ∙ Steinmetz, O.K. ...
Management trends and early mortality rates for acute type B aortic dissection: a 10 year single-institution experience
Ann Vasc Surg. 2004; 18:158-166
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
53.
Daily, P.O. ∙ Trueblood, H.W. ∙ Stinson, E.B. ...
Management of acute aortic dissections
Ann Thorac Surg. 1970; 10:237-247
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
54.
Hiratzka, L.F. ∙ Bakris, G.L. ∙ Beckman, J.A. ...
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines; American Association for Thoracic Surgery; American College of Radiology; American Stroke Association; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Interventional Radiology; Society of Thoracic Surgeons; Society for Vascular Medicine. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with Thoracic Aortic Disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine
Circulation. 2010; 121:e266-369
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
55.
Hagan, P.G. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Isselbacher, E.M. ...
The International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD): new insights into an old disease
J Am Med Assoc. 2000; 283:897-903
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
56.
Tsai, T.T. ∙ Trimarchi, S. ∙ Nienaber, C.A.
Acute aortic dissection: perspectives from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD)
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2009; 37:149-159
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (195)
PubMed
Google Scholar
57.
Collins, J.S. ∙ Evangelista, A. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ...
Differences in clinical presentation, management, and outcomes of acute type a aortic dissection in patients with and without previous cardiac surgery
Circulation. 2004; 110:II237-II242
PubMed
Google Scholar
58.
Bonderman, D. ∙ Gharehbaghi-Schnell, E. ∙ Wollenek, G. ...
Mechanisms underlying aortic dilatation in congenital aortic valve malformation
Circulation. 1999; 99:2138-2143
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
59.
Eagle, K.A. ∙ Isselbacher, E.M. ∙ DeSanctis, R.W.
Cocaine-related aortic dissection in perspective
Circulation. 2002; 105:1529-1530
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
60.
Suzuki, T. ∙ Mehta, R.H. ∙ Ince, H. ...
Clinical profiles and outcomes of acute type B aortic dissection in the current era: lessons from the International Registry of Aortic Dissection (IRAD)
Circulation. 2003; 108:II312-II317
PubMed
Google Scholar
61.
Hatzaras, I.S. ∙ Bible, J.E. ∙ Koullias, G.J. ...
Role of exertion or emotion as inciting events for acute aortic dissection
Am J Cardiol. 2007; 100:1470-1472
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
62.
Albornoz, G. ∙ Coady, M.A. ∙ Roberts, M. ...
Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections – incidence, modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006; 82:1400-1405
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
63.
Hasham, S.N. ∙ Willing, M.C. ∙ Guo, D.C. ...
Mapping a locus for familial thoracic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD2) to 3p24–25
Circulation. 2003; 107:3184-3190
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
64.
Renard, M. ∙ Callewaert, B. ∙ Baetens, M. ...
Novel MYH11 and ACTA2 mutations reveal a role for enhanced TGFβ signaling in FTAAD
Int J Cardiol. 2013; 165:314-321
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (58)
PubMed
Google Scholar
65.
Elefteriades, J.A.
Natural history of thoracic aortic aneurysms: indications for surgery, and surgical versus nonsurgical risks
Ann Thorac Surg. 2002; 74:S1877-S1880
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (421)
PubMed
Google Scholar
66.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Jonker, F.H. ∙ Froehlich, J.B. ...
Descending aortic diameter of 5.5 cm or greater is not an accurate predictor of acute type B aortic dissection
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 142:e101-e107
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
67.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Jonker, F.H. ∙ Froehlich, J.B. ..., International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) Investigators
Acute type B aortic dissection in the absence of aortic dilatation
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 56:311-316
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (13)
PubMed
Google Scholar
68.
Nallamothu, B.K. ∙ Mehta, R.H. ∙ Saint, S. ...
Syncope in acute aortic dissection: diagnostic, prognostic, and clinical implications
Am J Med. 2002; 113:468-471
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
69.
Park, S.W. ∙ Hutchison, S. ∙ Mehta, R.H. ...
Association of painless acute aortic dissection with increased mortality
Mayo Clin Proc. 2004; 79:1252-1257
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
70.
Estrera, A.L. ∙ Miller, C.C. ∙ Goodrick, J. ...
Update on outcomes of acute type B aortic dissection
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:S842-S845
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (88)
PubMed
Google Scholar
71.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Rampoldi, V. ...
Role and results of surgery in acute type B aortic dissection: insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD)
Circulation. 2006; 114:I357-I364
PubMed
Google Scholar
72.
Sakakura, K. ∙ Kubo, N. ∙ Ako, J. ...
Determinants of in hospital death and rupture in patients with a Stanford B aortic dissection
Circ J. 2007; 71:1521-1524
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
73.
Williams, D.M. ∙ Lee, D.Y. ∙ Hamilton, B.H. ...
The dissected aorta: part III. Anatomy and radiologic diagnosis of branch-vessel compromise
Radiology. 1997; 203:37-44
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
74.
Tshomba, Y. ∙ Coppi, G. ∙ Marone, E.M. ...
Diagnostic laparoscopy for early detection of acute mesenteric ischaemia in patients with aortic dissection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012; 43:690-697
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (15)
PubMed
Google Scholar
75.
Born, C. ∙ Forster, A. ∙ Rock, C. ...
A case of an upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to a ruptured dissection of a right aortic arch
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2003; 26:506-509
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
76.
Vedantham, S. ∙ Picus, D. ∙ Sanchez, L.A. ...
Percutaneous management of ischaemic complications in patients with type-B aortic dissection
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003; 14:181-194
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
77.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Eagle, K.A. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ...
Importance of refractory pain and hypertension in acute type B aortic dissection: insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD)
Circulation. 2010; 122:1283-1289
Crossref
Scopus (88)
PubMed
Google Scholar
78.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Tolenaar, J.L. ∙ Tsai, T.T. ...
Influence of clinical presentation on the outcome of acute B aortic dissection: evidences from IRAD
J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2012; 53:161-168
PubMed
Google Scholar
79.
Suzuki, T. ∙ Isselbacher, E.M. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ...
Type-selective benefits of medications in treatment of acute aortic dissection (from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection [IRAD])
Am J Cardiol. 2012; 109:122-127
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (68)
PubMed
Google Scholar
80.
Genoni, M. ∙ Paul, M. ∙ Jenni, R. ...
Chronic beta blocker therapy improves outcome and reduces treatment costs in chronic type B aortic dissection
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2001; 19:606-610
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
81.
Lacro, R.V. ∙ Dietz, H.C. ∙ Sleeper, L.A. ..., Pediatric Heart Network Investigators
N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:2061-2071
Crossref
Scopus (152)
PubMed
Google Scholar
82.
Forteza, A. ∙ Evangelista, A. ∙ Sánchez, V. ...
Efficacy of losartan vs. atenolol for the prevention of aortic dilation in Marfan syndrome: a randomized clinical trial
Eur Heart J. 2016; 37:978-985
Crossref
Scopus (5)
PubMed
Google Scholar
83.
Neal, B. ∙ MacMahon, S. ∙ Chapman, N.
Effects of ACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists, and other blood-pressure-lowering drugs: results of prospectively designed overviews of randomised trials. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists' Collaboration
Lancet. 2000; 356:1955-1964
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (1459)
PubMed
Google Scholar
84.
Eggebrecht, H. ∙ Schmermund, A. ∙ von Birgelen, C. ...
Resistant hypertension in patients with chronic aortic dissection
J Hum Hypertens. 2005; 19:227-231
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
85.
Tsai, T.T. ∙ Fattori, R. ∙ Trimarchi, S. ...
Long-term survival in patients presenting with type B acute aortic dissection: insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection
Circulation. 2006; 114:2226-2231
Crossref
Scopus (302)
PubMed
Google Scholar
86.
Cambria, R.P. ∙ Clouse, W.D. ∙ Davison, J.K. ...
A multicenter clinical trial of endovascular stent graft repair of acute catastrophes of the descending thoracic aorta
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 50:1255-1264
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (110)
PubMed
Google Scholar
87.
Zeeshan, A. ∙ Woo, E.Y. ∙ Bavaria, J.E. ...
Thoracic endovascular aortic repair for acute complicated type B aortic dissection: superiority relative to conventional OS and medical therapy
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010; 140:S109-S115
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
88.
Svensson, L.G. ∙ Kouchoukos, N.T. ∙ Miller, D.C. ...
Expert consensus document on the treatment of descending thoracic aortic disease using endovascular stent grafts
Ann Thorac Surg. 2008; 85:S1-S41
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
89.
Umana, J.P. ∙ Lai, D.T. ∙ Mitchell, R.S. ...
What is the best treatment for patients with acute type B aortic dissections – medical, surgical, or endovascular stent grafting?
Ann Thorac Surg. 2002; 74:S1840-S1843
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
90.
Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Fattori, R. ∙ Lund, G. ...
Nonsurgical reconstruction of thoracic aortic dissection by stent graft placement
N Engl J Med. 1999; 340:1539-1545
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
91.
Sayer, D. ∙ Bratby, M. ∙ Brooks, M. ...
Aortic morphology following endovascular repair of acute and chronic type B aortic dissection: implications for management
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008; 36:522-529
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (99)
PubMed
Google Scholar
92.
Verhoye, J.P. ∙ Miller, D.C. ∙ Sze, D. ...
Complicated acute type B aortic dissection: midterm results of emergency endovascular stent grafting
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008; 136:424-430
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
93.
Steuer, J. ∙ Eriksson, M.O. ∙ Nyman, R. ...
Early and long-term outcome after thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for acute complicated type B aortic dissection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011; 41:318-323
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (61)
PubMed
Google Scholar
94.
Fattori, R. ∙ Tsai, T.T. ∙ Myrmel, T. ...
Complicated acute type B dissection: is surgery still the best option?: a report from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2008; 1:395-402
Crossref
Scopus (225)
PubMed
Google Scholar
95.
Dake, M.D. ∙ Kato, N. ∙ Mitchell, R.S. ...
Endovascular stent graft placement for the treatment of acute aortic dissection
N Engl J Med. 1999; 340:1546-1552
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
96.
Parker, J.D. ∙ Golledge, J.
Outcome of endovascular treatment of acute type B aortic dissection
Ann Thorac Surg. 2008; 86:1707-1712
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (76)
PubMed
Google Scholar
97.
Xiong, J. ∙ Jiang, B. ∙ Guo, W. ...
Endovascular stent graft placement in patients with type B aortic dissection: a meta-analysis in China
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 138:865-872
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (37)
PubMed
Google Scholar
98.
Heijmen, R. ∙ Fattori, R. ∙ Thompson, M. ..., Virtue Registry Investigators
The VIRTUE Registry of type B thoracic dissections – study design and early results
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011; 41:159-166
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (34)
PubMed
Google Scholar
99.
Lombardi, J.V. ∙ Cambria, R.P. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ...
Prospective multicenter clinical trial (STABLE) on the endovascular treatment of complicated type B aortic dissection using a composite device design
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 55:629-640
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (92)
PubMed
Google Scholar
100.
Barnes, D.M. ∙ Williams, D.M. ∙ Dasika, N.L. ...
A single center experience treating renal malperfusion after aortic dissection with central aortic fenestration and renal artery stenting
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 47:903-910
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
101.
Deeb, G.M. ∙ Patel, H.J. ∙ Williams, D.M.
Treatment for malperfusion syndrome in acute type A and B aortic dissection: a long-term analysis
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010; 140:S98-S100
[discussion S142–S146]
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
102.
Midulla, M. ∙ Renaud, A. ∙ Martinelli, T. ...
Endovascular fenestration in aortic dissection with acute malperfusion syndrome: immediate and late follow up
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 142:66-72
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
103.
Fattori, R. ∙ Montgomery, D. ∙ Lovato, L. ...
Survival after endovascular therapy in patients with type B aortic dissection: a report from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD)
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2013; 6:876-882
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
104.
Brunkwall, J. ∙ Kasprzak, P. ∙ Verhoeven, E. ..., the ADSORB Trialists
Endovascular repair of acute uncomplicated aortic type B dissection promotes aortic remodelling: 1 year results of the ADSORB trial
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014; 48:285-291
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (67)
PubMed
Google Scholar
105.
Bockler, D. ∙ Schumacher, H. ∙ Ganten, M. ...
Complications after endovascular repair of acute symptomatic and chronic expanding Stanford type B aortic dissections
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006; 132:361-368
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (99)
PubMed
Google Scholar
106.
Kasirajan, K. ∙ Dake, M.D. ∙ Lumsden, A. ...
Incidence and outcomes after infolding or collapse of thoracic stent grafts
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 55:652-658
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (37)
PubMed
Google Scholar
107.
Eggebrecht, H. ∙ Thompson, M. ∙ Rousseau, H. ...
Retrograde ascending aortic dissection during or after thoracic aortic stent graft placement: insight from the European registry on endovascular aortic repair complications
Circulation. 2009; 120:S276-S281
Crossref
Scopus (179)
PubMed
Google Scholar
108.
Dake, M.D. ∙ Thompson, M. ∙ van Sambeek, M. ..., DEFINE Investigators
DISSECT: a new mnemonic-based approach to the categorisation of aortic dissection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2013; 46:175-190
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
109.
Khoynezhad, A. ∙ Donayre, C.E. ∙ Omari, B.O. ...
Midterm results of endovascular treatment of complicated acute type B aortic dissection
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 138:625-631
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (62)
PubMed
Google Scholar
110.
Coselli, J.S. ∙ LeMaire, S.A. ∙ de Figueiredo, L.P. ...
Paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: is dissection a risk factor?
Ann Thorac Surg. 1997; 63:28-35
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
111.
Miller, D.C.
Surgical management of acute aortic dissection: new data
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991; 3:225-237
PubMed
Google Scholar
112.
Svensson, L.G. ∙ Crawford, E.S. ∙ Hess, K.R. ...
Dissection of the aorta and dissecting aortic aneurysms. Improving early and long-term surgical results
Circulation. 1990; 82:IV24-38
PubMed
Google Scholar
113.
Trimarchi, S. ∙ Jonker, F.H. ∙ Muhs, B.E. ...
Long-term outcomes of surgical aortic fenestration for complicated acute type B aortic dissections
J Vasc Surg. 2010; 52:261-266
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (17)
PubMed
Google Scholar
114.
Coselli, J.S. ∙ LeMaire, S.A. ∙ Conklin, L.D. ...
Left heart bypass during descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair does not reduce the incidence of paraplegia
Ann Thorac Surg. 2004; 77:1298-1303
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (106)
PubMed
Google Scholar
115.
Bozinovski, J. ∙ Coselli, J.S.
Outcomes and survival in surgical treatment of descending thoracic aorta with acute dissection
Ann Thorac Surg. 2008; 85:965-970
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (66)
PubMed
Google Scholar
116.
Lansman, S.L. ∙ Hagl, C. ∙ Fink, D. ...
Acute type B aortic dissection: surgical therapy
Ann Thorac Surg. 2002; 74:S1833-S1835
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
117.
Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Eagle, K.A.
Aortic dissection: new frontiers in diagnosis and management: part I: from etiology to diagnostic strategies
Circulation. 2003; 108:628-635
Crossref
Scopus (371)
PubMed
Google Scholar
118.
Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Sievers, H.H.
Intramural hematoma in acute aortic syndrome; more than one variant of dissection?
Circulation. 2002; 106:284-285
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
119.
Evangelista, A. ∙ Czerny, M. ∙ Nienaber, C. ...
Interdisciplinary expert consensus on management of type B intramural haematoma and penetrating aortic ulcer
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015; 47:1037-1043
Crossref
Scopus (8)
PubMed
Google Scholar
120.
Ince, H. ∙ Nienaber, C.A.
Diagnosis and management of patients with aortic dissection
Heart. 2007; 93:266-270
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
121.
Nathan, D.P. ∙ Boonn, W. ∙ Lai, E. ...
Presentation, complications, and natural history of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer disease
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 55:10-15
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
122.
von Kodolitsch, Y. ∙ Csösz, S.K. ∙ Koschyk, D.H. ...
Intramural hematoma of the aorta: predictors of progression to dissection and rupture
Circulation. 2003; 107:1158-1163
Crossref
Scopus (205)
PubMed
Google Scholar
123.
Geisbüsch, P. ∙ Kotelis, D. ∙ Weber, T.F. ...
Early and midterm results after endovascular stent graft repair of penetrating aortic ulcers
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 48:1361-1368
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (32)
PubMed
Google Scholar
124.
Eggebrecht, H. ∙ Plicht, B. ∙ Kahlert, P. ...
Intramural hematoma and penetrating ulcers: indications to endovascular treatment
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2009; 38:659-665
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (88)
PubMed
Google Scholar
125.
Clough, R.E. ∙ Mani, K. ∙ Lyons, O.T. ...
Endovascular treatment of acute aortic syndrome
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 54:1580-1587
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (20)
PubMed
Google Scholar
126.
Jonker, F.H. ∙ Trimarchi, S. ∙ Verhagen, H.J. ...
Meta-analysis of open versus endovascular repair for ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm
J Vasc Surg. 2010; 51:1026-1030
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (108)
PubMed
Google Scholar
127.
Jonker, F.H. ∙ Verhagen, H.J. ∙ Lin, P.H. ...
OR versus endovascular repair of ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 53:1210-1216
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
128.
Gopaldas, R.R. ∙ Dao, T.K. ∙ LeMaire, S.A. ...
Endovascular versus open repair of ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysms: a nationwide risk-adjusted study of 923 patients
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 142:1010-1018
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (37)
PubMed
Google Scholar
129.
Patel, H.J. ∙ Williams, D.M. ∙ Upchurch, Jr., G.R. ...
A 15 year comparative analysis of open and endovascular repair for the ruptured descending thoracic aorta
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 50:1265-1270
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
130.
Vaghetti, M. ∙ Palmieri, C. ∙ Al-Jabri, A. ...
Endovascular treatment of acute thoracic aortic syndromes with a proximal zone extension strategy: procedural and follow up results
J Invasive Cardiol. 2011; 23:187-192
PubMed
Google Scholar
131.
Pecoraro, F. ∙ Pfammatter, T. ∙ Mayer, D. ...
Multiple periscope and chimney grafts to treat ruptured thoracoabdominal and pararenal aortic aneurysms
J Endovasc Ther. 2011; 18:642-649
Crossref
Scopus (60)
PubMed
Google Scholar
132.
Burkhart, H.M. ∙ Gomez, G.A. ∙ Jacobson, L.E. ...
Fatal blunt aortic injuries: a review of 242 autopsy cases
J Trauma. 2001; 50:113-115
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
133.
Neschis, D.G. ∙ Scalea, T.M. ∙ Flinn, W.R. ...
Blunt aortic injury
N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1708-1716
Crossref
Scopus (116)
PubMed
Google Scholar
134.
Nagy, K. ∙ Fabian, T. ∙ Rodman, G. ...
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of blunt aortic injury: an EAST Practice Management Guidelines Work Group
J Trauma. 2000; 48:1128-1143
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
135.
Malhorta, A.K. ∙ Fabian, T.C. ∙ Croce, M.A. ...
Minimal aortic injury: a lesion associated with advancing diagnostic techniques
J Trauma. 2001; 51:1042-1048
PubMed
Google Scholar
136.
Azizzadeh, A. ∙ Keyhani, K. ∙ Miller, III, C.C. ...
Blunt traumatic aortic injury: initial experience with endovascular repair
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:1403-1408
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (117)
PubMed
Google Scholar
137.
Heystraten, F.M. ∙ Rosenbusch, G. ∙ Kingma, L.M. ...
Chronic posttraumatic aneurysm of the thoracic aorta: surgically correctable occult threat
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1986; 148:303-308
Crossref
Google Scholar
138.
Finkelmeier, B.A. ∙ Mentzner, R.M. ∙ Kaiser, D.L. ...
Chronic traumatic thoracic aneurysm – influence of operative treatment on natural history: an analysis of reported case 1950–1980
J Cardiovasc Surg. 1982; 84:257-266
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
Google Scholar
139.
Bennett, D.E. ∙ Cherry, J.K.
The natural history of traumatic aneurysms of the aorta
Surgery. 1967; 61:516-523
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
140.
Kirkham, J.R. ∙ Blackmore, C.C.
Screening for aortic injury with chest radiography and clinical factors
Emerg Radiol. 2007; 14:211-217
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
141.
Ekeh, A.P. ∙ Peterson, W. ∙ Woods, R.J. ...
Is chest x-ray an adequate screening tool for the diagnosis of blunt thoracic aortic injury?
J Trauma. 2008; 65:1088-1092
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
142.
Steenburg, S.D. ∙ Ravenel, J.G. ∙ Ikonomidis, J.S. ...
Acute traumatic aortic injury: imaging evaluation and management
Radiology. 2008; 248:748-762
Crossref
Scopus (67)
PubMed
Google Scholar
143.
Patel, N.H. ∙ Hahn, D. ∙ Comess, K.A.
Blunt chest trauma victims: role of intravascular ultrasound and transesophageal echocardiography in cases of abnormal thoracic aortogram
J Trauma. 2003; 55:330-337
Crossref
Scopus (30)
PubMed
Google Scholar
144.
Starnes, B.W. ∙ Lundgren, R.S. ∙ Gunn, M. ...
A new classification scheme for treating blunt aortic injury
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 55:47-54
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (63)
PubMed
Google Scholar
145.
Muhs, B.E. ∙ Vincken, K.L. ∙ van Prehn, J. ...
Dynamic cine-CT angiography for the evaluation of the thoracic aorta; insight in dynamic changes with implications for thoracic endograft treatment
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2006; 32:532-536
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (72)
PubMed
Google Scholar
146.
Fabian, T. ∙ Richardson, J. ∙ Croce, M.
Prospective study of blunt aortic injury: multicenter trial of the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma
J Trauma. 1997; 42:374-380
Crossref
Scopus (555)
PubMed
Google Scholar
147.
Estrera, A.L. ∙ Gochnour, D.C. ∙ Azizzadeh, A. ...
Progress in the treatment of blunt thoracic aortic injury: 12-year single-institution experience
Ann Thorac Surg. 2010; 90:64-71
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (52)
PubMed
Google Scholar
148.
Hemmila, M.R. ∙ Arbabi, S. ∙ Rowe, S.A. ...
Delayed repair for blunt thoracic aortic injury: is it really equivalent to early repair?
J Trauma. 2004; 56:13-23
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
149.
Demetriades, D. ∙ Velmahos, G.C. ∙ Scalea, T.M. ...
Operative repair or endovascular stent graft in blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injuries: results of an American Association for the Surgery of Trauma Multicenter Study
J Trauma. 2008; 64:561-570
Crossref
Scopus (236)
PubMed
Google Scholar
150.
Murad, M.H. ∙ Rizvi, A.Z. ∙ Malgor, R. ...
Comparative effectiveness of the treatments for aortic transection
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 53:193-199
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
151.
Lee, W.A. ∙ Matsumura, J.S. ∙ Mitchell, R.S. ...
Endovascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular Surgery
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 53:187-192
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (187)
PubMed
Google Scholar
152.
Bhaskar, J. ∙ Foo, J. ∙ Sharma, A.K.
Clamp-and-sew technique for traumatic injuries of the aorta: 20-year experience
Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann. 2010; 18:161-165
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
153.
Von Oppel, O.U. ∙ Dunne, T.T. ∙ De Groot, M.K. ...
Traumatic aortic rupture: twenty-year metaanalysis of mortality and risk of paraplegia
Ann Thorac Surg. 1994; 58:585-593
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
154.
Cardarelli, M.G. ∙ McLaughlin, J.S. ∙ Downing, S.W. ...
Management of traumatic aortic rupture: a 30 year experience
Ann Surg. 2002; 236:465-469
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
155.
Volodos, N.L.
Historical perspective: the first steps in endovascular aortic repair: how it all began
J Endovasc Ther. 2013; 20:13-23
PubMed
Google Scholar
156.
Geisbusch, P. ∙ Leszczynsky, M. ∙ Kotelis, D. ...
Open versus endovascular repair of acute aortic transections—a non-randomized single center analysis
Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2009; 394:1101-1107
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
157.
Steuer, J. ∙ Björck, M. ∙ Sonesson, B. ...
Editor's choice – Durability of endovascular repair in blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury: long-term outcome from four tertiary referral centres
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2015; 50:460-465
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
158.
Urgnani, F. ∙ Lerut, P. ∙ Da Rocha, M. ...
Endovascular treatment of acute traumatic thoracic aortic injuries: a retrospective analysis of 20 cases
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 138:1129-1138
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
159.
Karmy-Jones, R. ∙ Ferrigno, L. ∙ Teso, D. ...
Endovascular repair compared with operative repair of traumatic rupture of the thoracic aorta: a nonsystematic review and a plea for trauma-specific reporting guidelines
J Trauma. 2011; 71:1059-1072
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
160.
Hoffer, E.K. ∙ Forauer, A.R. ∙ Silas, A.M. ...
Endovascular stentgraft or OR for blunt thoracic aortic trauma: systematic review
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2008; 19:1153-1164
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
161.
Akowuah, E. ∙ Angelini, G. ∙ Bryan, A.J.
Open versus endovascular repair of traumatic aortic rupture: a systematic review
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 138:768-769
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
162.
Hong, M.S. ∙ Feezor, R.J. ∙ Lee, W.A. ...
The advent of thoracic endovascular aortic repair is associated with broadened treatment eligibility and decreased overall mortality in traumatic thoracic aortic injury
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 53:36-42
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (23)
PubMed
Google Scholar
163.
Muhs, B.E. ∙ Balm, R. ∙ White, G.H. ...
Anatomic factors associated with acute endograft collapse after Gore TAG treatment of thoracic aortic dissection or traumatic rupture
J Vasc Surg. 2007; 45:655-661
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (125)
PubMed
Google Scholar
164.
Jonker, F.H. ∙ Verhagen, H.J. ∙ Mojibian, H. ...
Aortic endograft sizing in trauma patients with hemodynamic instability
J Vasc Surg. 2010; 52:39-44
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (27)
PubMed
Google Scholar
165.
Demers, P. ∙ Miller, D.C. ∙ Mitchell, R.S. ...
Chronic traumatic aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta: mid-term results of endovascular repair using first and second-generation stent grafts
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004; 25:394-400
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
166.
Lookstein, R.A. ∙ Goldman, J. ∙ Pukin, L. ...
Time-resolved magnetic resonance angiography as a noninvasive method to characterize endoleaks: initial results compared with conventional angiography
J Vasc Surg. 2004; 39:27-33
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (60)
PubMed
Google Scholar
167.
Crawford, E.S.
The diagnosis and management of aortic dissection
J Am Med Assoc. 1990; 264:2537-2541
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
168.
Evangelista, A. ∙ Salas, A. ∙ Ribera, A. ...
Long-term outcome of aortic dissection with patent false lumen: predictive role of entry tear size and location
Circulation. 2012; 125:3133-3141
Crossref
Scopus (105)
PubMed
Google Scholar
169.
Winnerkvist, A. ∙ Lockowandt, U. ∙ Rasmussen, E. ...
A prospective study of medically treated acute type B aortic dissection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2006; 32:349-355
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (101)
PubMed
Google Scholar
170.
Marui, A. ∙ Mochizuki, T. ∙ Mitsui, N. ...
Toward the best treatment for uncomplicated patients with type B acute aortic dissection: a consideration for sound surgical indication
Circulation. 1999; 100:II275-II280
PubMed
Google Scholar
171.
Hata, M. ∙ Shiono, M. ∙ Inoue, T. ...
Optimal treatment of type B acute aortic dissection: long-term medical follow up results
Ann Thorac Surg. 2003; 75:1781-1784
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
172.
Immer, F.F. ∙ Krähenbühl, E. ∙ Hagen, U. ...
Large area of the false lumen favors secondary dilatation of the aorta after acute type A aortic dissection
Circulation. 2005; 112:I249-I252
PubMed
Google Scholar
173.
Sueyoshi, E. ∙ Sakamoto, I. ∙ Hayashi, K. ...
Growth rate of aortic diameter in patients with type B aortic dissection during the chronic phase
Circulation. 2004; 110:II256-II261
PubMed
Google Scholar
174.
Tsai, T.T. ∙ Evangelista, A. ∙ Nienaber, C.A. ...
Partial thrombosis of the false lumen in patients with acute type B aortic dissection
N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:349-359
Crossref
Scopus (322)
PubMed
Google Scholar
175.
Tsai, T.T. ∙ Schlicht, M.S. ∙ Khanafer, K. ...
Tear size and location impacts false lumen pressure in an ex vivo model of chronic type B aortic dissection
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 47:844-851
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (84)
PubMed
Google Scholar
176.
Pitt, M.P. ∙ Bonser, R.S.
The natural history of thoracic aortic aneurysm disease: an overview
J Card Surg. 1997; 12:270-278
PubMed
Google Scholar
177.
Elefteriades, J.A. ∙ Lovoulos, C.J. ∙ Coady, M.A. ...
Management of descending aortic dissection
Ann Thorac Surg. 1999; 67:2002-2005
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (162)
PubMed
Google Scholar
178.
Griepp, R.B. ∙ Ergin, M.A. ∙ Galla, J.D. ...
Natural history of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysms
Ann Thorac Surg. 1999; 67:1927-1930
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (135)
PubMed
Google Scholar
179.
Onitsuka, S. ∙ Akashi, H. ∙ Tayama, K. ...
Long-term outcome and prognostic predictors of medically treated acute type B aortic dissections
Ann Thorac Surg. 2004; 78:1268-1273
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (106)
PubMed
Google Scholar
180.
Zoli, S. ∙ Etz, C.D. ∙ Roder, F. ...
Long-term survival after open repair of chronic distal aortic dissection
Ann Thorac Surg. 2010; 89:1458-1466
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (44)
PubMed
Google Scholar
181.
Nishida, T. ∙ Masuda, M. ∙ Tomita, Y. ...
The logistic EuroSCORE predicts the hospital mortality of the thoracic aortic surgery in consecutive 327 Japanese patients better than the additive EuroSCORE
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2006; 30:578-582
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
182.
Bakaeen, F.G. ∙ Chu, D. ∙ Huh, J. ...
Contemporary outcomes of open thoracic aortic surgery in a veteran population: do risk models exaggerate mortality?
Am J Surg. 2009; 198:889-894
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
183.
Conrad, M.F. ∙ Chung, T.K. ∙ Cambria, M.R. ...
Effect of chronic dissection on early and late outcomes after descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 53:600-607
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (9)
PubMed
Google Scholar
184.
Crawford, E.S. ∙ Crawford, J.L. ∙ Safi, H.J. ...
Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: pre-operative and intra-operative factors determining immediate and long-term results of operations in 605 patients
J Vasc Surg. 1986; 3:389-404
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
185.
Safi, H.J. ∙ Miller, 3rd, C.C. ∙ Estrera, A.L. ...
Chronic aortic dissection not a risk factor for neurologic deficit in thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2002; 23:244-250
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
186.
Conrad, M.F. ∙ Ergul, E.A. ∙ Patel, V.I. ...
Management of diseases of the descending thoracic aorta in the endovascular era: a Medicare population study
Ann Surg. 2010; 252:603-610
Crossref
Scopus (91)
PubMed
Google Scholar
187.
Thrumurthy, S.G. ∙ Karthikesalingam, A. ∙ Patterson, B.O. ...
A systematic review of mid-term outcomes of thoracic endovascular repair (TEVAR) of chronic type B aortic dissection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011; 42:632-647
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (82)
PubMed
Google Scholar
188.
Nordon, I.M. ∙ Hinchliffe, R.J. ∙ Loftus, I.M. ...
Management of acute aortic syndrome and chronic aortic dissection
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2011; 34:890-902
Crossref
Scopus (22)
PubMed
Google Scholar
189.
Song, J.M. ∙ Kim, S.D. ∙ Kim, J.H. ...
Long-term predictors of descending aorta aneurysmal change in patients with aortic dissection
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007; 50:799-804
Crossref
Scopus (146)
PubMed
Google Scholar
190.
Nienaber, C.A. ∙ Kische, S. ∙ Rousseau, H. ...
Endovascular repair of type B aortic dissection: long-term results of the randomized investigation of stent grafts in aortic dissection trial
Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2013; 6:407-416
Crossref
Scopus (245)
PubMed
Google Scholar
191.
Kang, W.C. ∙ Greenberg, R.K. ∙ Mastracci, T.M. ...
Endovascular repair of complicated chronic distal aortic dissections: intermediate outcomes and complications
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 142:1074-1083
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (68)
Google Scholar
192.
Rodriguez, J.A. ∙ Olsen, D.M. ∙ Lucas, L. ...
Aortic remodeling after endografting of thoracoabdominal aortic dissection
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 47:1188-1194
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (91)
PubMed
Google Scholar
193.
Nordon, I.M. ∙ Hinchliffe, R.J. ∙ Holt, P.J. ...
Endovascular management of chronic aortic dissection in patients with Marfan syndrome
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 50:987-991
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (53)
PubMed
Google Scholar
194.
Kölbel, T. ∙ Carpenter, S.W. ∙ Lohrenz, C. ...
Addressing persistent false lumen flow in chronic aortic dissection: the knickerbocker technique
J Endovasc Ther. 2014; 21:117-122
Crossref
Scopus (21)
PubMed
Google Scholar
195.
Bonser, R.S. ∙ Pagano, D. ∙ Lewis, M.E. ...
Clinical and patho-anatomical factors affecting expansion of thoracic aortic aneurysms
Heart. 2000; 84:277-283
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
196.
Perko, M.J. ∙ Norgaard, M. ∙ Herzog, T.M. ...
Unoperated aortic aneurysm: a survey of 170 patients
Ann Thorac Surg. 1995; 59:1204-1209
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (100)
PubMed
Google Scholar
197.
Mitchell, S.L.
Stent grafts for the thoracic aorta: a new paradigm?
Ann Vasc Surg. 2002; 74:S1818-S1820
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Google Scholar
198.
Jacobs, M.J. ∙ de Mol, B.A. ∙ Elenbaas, T. ...
Spinal cord blood supply in patients with thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms
J Vasc Surg. 2002; 35:30-37
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (123)
PubMed
Google Scholar
199.
Backes, W.H. ∙ Nijenhuis, R.J. ∙ Mess, W.H. ...
Magnetic resonance angiography of collateral blood supply to spinal cord in thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm patients
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 48:261-271
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (44)
PubMed
Google Scholar
200.
Czerny, M. ∙ Eggebrecht, H. ∙ Sodeck, G. ...
Mechanisms of symptomatic spinal cord ischaemia after TEVAR: insights from the European Registry of Endovascular Aortic Repair Complications (EuREC)
J Endovasc Ther. 2012; 19:37-43
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
201.
Mehta, V.K. ∙ Lafaro, R.J. ∙ De Vincenzo, S.
Successful management of an aneurysmal aortoesophageal fistula
J Cardiovasc Surg. 2000; 41:721-723
PubMed
Google Scholar
202.
Estrera, A.L. ∙ Miller, III, C.C. ∙ Chen, E.P. ...
Descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: 12-year experience using distal aortic perfusion and cerebrospinal fluid drainage
Ann Thorac Surg. 2005; 80:1290-1296
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (147)
PubMed
Google Scholar
203.
Poldermans, D. ∙ Schouten, O. ∙ Vidakovic, R. ...
A clinical randomized trial to evaluate the safety of a noninvasive approach in high risk patients undergoing major vascular surgery: the DECREASE-V Pilot Study
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007; 49:1763-1769
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
204.
Eagle, K.A. ∙ Rihal, C.S. ∙ Mickel, M.C. ...
Cardiac risk of noncardiac surgery. CASS Investigators and University of Michigan Heart Care Program influence of coronary disease and type of surgery in 3368 operations. Coronary Artery Surgery Study
Circulation. 1997; 96:1882-1887
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
205.
Svensson, L.G. ∙ Hess, K.R. ∙ Coselli, J.S. ...
A prospective study of respiratory failure after high risk surgery on the thoracoabdominal aorta
J Vasc Surg. 1991; 14:271-282
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
206.
Safi, H.J. ∙ Harlin, S.A. ∙ Miller, C.C. ...
Predictive factors for acute renal failure in thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery
J Vasc Surg. 1996; 24:338-344
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (143)
PubMed
Google Scholar
207.
Fehrenbacher, J.W. ∙ Hart, D.W. ∙ Huddleston, E. ...
Optimal end-organ protection for thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair using deep hypothermic circulatory arrest
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:1041-1046
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
208.
Patel, H.J. ∙ Shillingford, M.S. ∙ Mihalik, S. ...
Resection of the descending thoracic aorta: outcomes after use of hypothermic circulatory arrest
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006; 82:90-95
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (35)
PubMed
Google Scholar
209.
Minatoya, K. ∙ Ogino, H. ∙ Matsuda, H. ...
Replacement of the descending aorta: recent outcomes of OR performed with partial cardiopulmonary bypass
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008; 136:431-435
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
210.
Schermerhorn, M.L. ∙ Giles, K.A. ∙ Hamdan, A.D. ...
Population-based outcomes of open descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 48:821-827
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (62)
PubMed
Google Scholar
211.
Abraha, I. ∙ Romagnoli, C. ∙ Montedori, A. ...
Thoracic stent graft versus surgery for thoracic aneurysm
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;, CD006796
PubMed
Google Scholar
212.
Walsh, S.R. ∙ Tang, T.Y. ∙ Sadat, U. ...
Endovascular stenting versus OR for thoracic aortic disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of peri-operative results
J Vasc Surg. 2008; 47:1094-1098
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
213.
Goodney, P.P. ∙ Travis, L.F. ∙ Lucas, F.L. ...
Survival after open versus endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair in an observational study of the Medicare population
Circulation. 2011; 124:2661-2669
Crossref
Scopus (111)
PubMed
Google Scholar
214.
Cheng, D. ∙ Martin, J. ∙ Shennib, H. ...
Endovascular aortic repair versus OR for descending thoracic aortic disease a systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative studies
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010; 55:986-1001
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
215.
Coady, M.A. ∙ Ikonomidis, J.S. ∙ Cheung, A.T. ...
Surgical management of descending thoracic aortic disease: open and endovascular approaches: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Circulation. 2010; 121:2780-2804
Crossref
Scopus (82)
PubMed
Google Scholar
216.
Ullery, B.W. ∙ Cheung, A.T. ∙ Fairman, R.M. ...
Risk factors, outcomes, and clinical manifestations of spinal cord ischaemia following thoracic endovascular aortic repair
J Vasc Surg. 2011; 54:677-684
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
217.
Martin, D.J. ∙ Martin, T.D. ∙ Hess, P.J. ...
Spinal cord ischaemia after TEVAR in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:302-306
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
218.
Chiesa, R. ∙ Melissano, G. ∙ Marrocco-Trischitta, M.M. ...
Spinal cord ischaemia after elective stent graft repair of the thoracic aorta
J Vasc Surg. 2005; 42:11-17
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
219.
Cooper, D.G. ∙ Walsh, S.R. ∙ Sadat, U. ...
Neurological complications after left subclavian artery coverage during thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a systematic review and meta-analysis
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:1594-1601
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (105)
PubMed
Google Scholar
220.
Leon, Jr., L.R. ∙ Mills, Sr., J.L. ∙ Jordan, W. ...
The risks of coeliac artery coverage during endoluminal repair of thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms
Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2009; 43:51-60
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
221.
Libicher, M. ∙ Reichert, V. ∙ Aleksic, M. ...
Balloon occlusion of the coeliac artery: a test for evaluation of collateral circulation prior endovascular coverage
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008; 36:303-305
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
222.
Safi, H.J. ∙ Winnerkvist, A. ∙ Miller, 3rd, C.C. ...
Effect of extended cross-clamp time during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Ann Thorac Surg. 1998; 66:1204-1209
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
223.
Cambria, R.A. ∙ Gloviczki, P. ∙ Stanson, A.W. ...
Outcome and expansion rate of 57 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms managed non-operatively
Am J Surg. 1995; 170:213-217
Abstract
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
224.
Suzuki, S. ∙ Davis, 3rd, C.A. ∙ Miller, 3rd, C.C. ...
Cardiac function predicts mortality following thoracoabdominal and descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2003; 24:119-124
Crossref
Scopus (19)
PubMed
Google Scholar
225.
Coselli, J.S. ∙ LeMaire, S.A. ∙ Conklin, L.D. ...
Morbidity and mortality after extent II thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Ann Thorac Surg. 2002; 73:1107-1115
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (149)
PubMed
Google Scholar
226.
LeMaire, S.A. ∙ Miller, 3rd, C.C. ∙ Conklin, L.D. ...
A new predictive model for adverse outcomes after elective thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Ann Thorac Surg. 2001; 71:1233-1238
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (86)
PubMed
Google Scholar
227.
Coselli, J.S. ∙ Bozinovski, J. ∙ LeMaire, S.A.
OR of 2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:S862-S864
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
228.
LeMaire, S.A. ∙ Jones, M.M. ∙ Conklin, L.D. ...
Randomized comparison of cold blood and cold crystalloid renal perfusion for renal protection during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
J Vasc Surg. 2009; 49:11-19
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (58)
PubMed
Google Scholar
229.
Hanssen, S.J. ∙ Derikx, J.P. ∙ Vermeulen Windsant, I.C. ...
Visceral injury and systemic inflammation in patients undergoing extracorporeal circulation during aortic surgery
Ann Surg. 2008; 248:117-125
Crossref
Scopus (53)
PubMed
Google Scholar
230.
Fedorow, C.A. ∙ Moon, M.C. ∙ Mutch, W.A. ...
Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid drainage for thoracoabdominal aortic surgery: rationale and practical considerations for management
Anesth Analg. 2010; 111:46-58
Crossref
Scopus (57)
PubMed
Google Scholar
231.
Conrad, M.F. ∙ Crawford, R.S. ∙ Davison, J.K. ...
Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: a 20-year perspective
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:S856-S861
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (222)
PubMed
Google Scholar
232.
Bicknell, C.D. ∙ Riga, C.V. ∙ Wolfe, J.H.N.
Prevention of paraplegia during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2009; 37:654-660
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (48)
PubMed
Google Scholar
233.
Rigberg, D.A. ∙ McGory, M.L. ∙ Zingmond, D.S. ...
Thirty-day mortality statistics underestimate the risk of repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: a state wide experience
J Vasc Surg. 2006; 43:217-222
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
234.
Cowan, J.A. ∙ Dimick, J.B. ∙ Henke, P.K. ...
Surgical treatment of intact thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in the United States: hospital and surgeon volume-related outcomes
J Vasc Surg. 2003; 37:1169-1174
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (244)
PubMed
Google Scholar
235.
Karthikesalingam, A. ∙ Hinchliffe, R.J. ∙ Loftus, I.M. ...
Volume-outcome relationships in vascular surgery: the current status
J Endovasc Ther. 2010; 17:356-365
Crossref
Scopus (44)
PubMed
Google Scholar
236.
Lee, W.A. ∙ Brown, M.P. ∙ Martin, T.D. ...
Early results after staged hybrid repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms
J Am Coll Surg. 2007; 205:420-431
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
237.
Chiesa, R. ∙ Tshomba, Y. ∙ Marone, E.M. ...
Hybrid procedures for the treatment of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms and dissections
J Cardiovasc Surg. 2010; 51:821-832
PubMed
Google Scholar
238.
Shahverdyan, R. ∙ Gawenda, M. ∙ Brunkwall, J.
Five-year patency rates of renal and visceral bypasses after abdominal debranching for thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysms
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2013; 45:648-656
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
239.
Maurel, B. ∙ Delclaux, N. ∙ Sobocinski, J. ...
The impact of early pelvic and lower limb reperfusion and attentive peri-operative management on the incidence of spinal cord ischemia during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm endovascular repair
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2015; 49:248-254
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (46)
PubMed
Google Scholar
240.
Verhoeven, E.L. ∙ Katsargyris, A. ∙ Bekkema, F. ...
Editor's Choice – Ten-year experience with endovascular repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: results from 166 consecutive patients
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2015; 49:524-531
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
241.
Mastracci, T.M. ∙ Greenberg, R.K. ∙ Eagleton, M.J. ...
Durability of branches in branched and fenestrated endografts
J Vasc Surg. 2013; 57:926-933
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (108)
PubMed
Google Scholar
242.
Haulon, S. ∙ Barillà, D. ∙ Tyrrell, M.
Fenestrated endografts should be restricted to a small number of specialized centers
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2013; 45:200-203
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
243.
Clough, R.E. ∙ Modarai, B. ∙ Bell, R.E. ...
Total endovascular repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012; 43:262-267
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (24)
PubMed
Google Scholar
244.
Takayasu, M.
Acta Societatis Ophthalmologicae Japonicae, Tokyo, 1908 554
Google Scholar
245.
Arend, W.P. ∙ Michel, B.A. ∙ Bloch, D.A. ...
The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of Takayasu arteritis
Arthritis Rheum. 1990; 33:1129-1134
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
246.
Baril, D.T. ∙ Carroccio, A. ∙ Palchik, E. ...
Endovascular treatment of complicated aortic aneurysms in patients with underlying arteriopathies
Ann Vasc Surg. 2006; 20:464-471
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (36)
PubMed
Google Scholar
247.
Hunder, G.G. ∙ Bloch, D.A. ∙ Michel, B.A. ...
The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of giant cell arteritis
Arthritis Rheum. 1990; 33:1122-1128
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
248.
Ninan, J. ∙ Nguyen, A.M. ∙ Cole, A. ...
Mortality in patients with biopsy-proven giant cell arteritis: a South Australian population-based study
J Rheumatol. 2011; 38:2215-2217
Crossref
Scopus (31)
PubMed
Google Scholar
249.
Cid, M.C. ∙ Cebrian, M. ∙ Font, C. ...
Cell adhesion molecules in the development of inflammatory infiltrates in giant cell arteritis: inflammation-induced angiogenesis as the preferential site of leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions
Arthritis Rheum. 2000; 43:184-194
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
250.
Taylor-Gjevre, R. ∙ Vo, M. ∙ Shukla, D. ...
Temporal artery biopsy for giant cell arteritis
J Rheumatol. 2005; 32:1279-1282
PubMed
Google Scholar
251.
Nuenninghoff, D.M. ∙ Hunder, G.G. ∙ Christianson, T.J. ...
Incidence and predictors of large-artery complication (aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, and/or large-artery stenosis) in patients with giant cell arteritis: a population-based study over 50 years
Arthritis Rheum. 2003; 48:3522-3531
Crossref
Scopus (311)
PubMed
Google Scholar
252.
Nuenninghoff, D.M. ∙ Hunder, G.G. ∙ Christianson, T.J. ...
Mortality of large-artery complication (aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, and/or large-artery stenosis) in patients with giant cell arteritis: a population-based study over 50 years
Arthritis Rheum. 2003; 48:3532-3537
Crossref
Scopus (113)
PubMed
Google Scholar
253.
Töpel, I. ∙ Zorger, N. ∙ Steinbauer, M.
Inflammatory diseases of the aorta: Part 1: non-infectious aortitis
Gefasschirurgie. 2016; 21:80-86
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
254.
Hoffman, G.S. ∙ Cid, M.C. ∙ Rendt-Zagar, K.E. ...
Infliximab for maintenance of glucocorticosteroid-induced remission of giant cell arteritis: a randomized trial
Ann Intern Med. 2007; 146:621-630
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
255.
Nesher, G. ∙ Berkun, Y. ∙ Mates, M. ...
Low-dose aspirin in the treatment of giant cell arteritis
Arthritis Rheum. 2004; 50:1026-1027
Crossref
Scopus (240)
PubMed
Google Scholar
256.
Demirkesen, C. ∙ Öz, B. ∙ Göksel, S.
Behçet's disease: pathology
Yazıcı, Y. ∙ Yazıcı, H. (Editors)
Behçet's syndrome
Springer, New York, 2010; 215-242
Crossref
Google Scholar
257.
Tuzun, H. ∙ Seyahi, E. ∙ Arslan, C. ...
Management and prognosis of nonpulmonary large arterial disease in 25 patients with Behçet disease from a single center
J Vasc Surg. 2012; 55:157-163
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
258.
Tunaci, A. ∙ Berkmen, Y.M. ∙ Gokmen, E.
Thoracic involvement in Behcet's disease: pathologic, clinical, and imaging features
Am J Roentgenol. 1995; 164:51-56
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
259.
Miller, D.V. ∙ Maleszewski, J.J.
The pathology of large-vessel vasculitides
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011; 29:S92-S98
PubMed
Google Scholar
260.
Abe, S. ∙ Ooyasu, T. ∙ Itou, M. ...
Ruptured descending aortic aneurysm in a young woman with systemic lupus erythematosus
Kyobu Geka. 2010; 63:565-567
PubMed
Google Scholar
261.
Ho, V.B. ∙ Bakalov, V.K. ∙ Cooley, M. ...
Major vascular anomalies in Turner syndrome: prevalence and magnetic resonance angiographic features
Circulation. 2004; 110:1694-1700
Crossref
Scopus (194)
PubMed
Google Scholar
262.
Connolly, H.M. ∙ Huston, 3rd, J. ∙ Brown, Jr., R.D. ...
Intracranial aneurysms in patients with coarctation of the aorta: a prospective magnetic resonance angiographic study of 100 patients
Mayo Clin Proc. 2003; 78:1491-1499
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
263.
Nielsen, J.C. ∙ Powell, A.J. ∙ Gauvreau, K. ...
Magnetic resonance imaging predictors of coarctation severity
Circulation. 2005; 111:622-628
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
264.
Campbell, M.
Natural history of coarctation of the aorta
Br Heart J. 1970; 32:633-640
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
265.
Babu-Narayan, S.V. ∙ Mohiaddin, R.H. ∙ Cannell, T.M. ...
Cardiovascular changes after transcatheter endovascular stenting of adult aortic coarctation
Int J Cardiol. 2011; 149:157-163
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (8)
PubMed
Google Scholar
266.
Brown, M.L. ∙ Burkhart, H.M. ∙ Connolly, H.M. ...
Late outcomes of re-intervention on the descending aorta after repair of aortic coarctation
Circulation. 2010; 122:S81-S84
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
267.
Carr, J.A.
The results of catheter-based therapy compared with surgical repair of adult aortic coarctation
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006; 47:1101-1107
Crossref
Scopus (104)
PubMed
Google Scholar
268.
Tanous, D. ∙ Collins, N. ∙ Dehghani, P. ...
Covered stents in the management of coarctation of the aorta in the adult: initial results and 1 year angiographic and hemodynamic follow up
Int J Cardiol. 2010; 140:287-295
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
269.
Moltzer, E. ∙ Roos-Hesselink, J.W. ∙ Yap, S.C. ...
Endovascular stenting for aortic (re) coarctation in adults
Neth Heart J. 2010; 18:430-436
Crossref
PubMed
Google Scholar
270.
Keane, M.G. ∙ Pyeritz, R.E.
Medical management of Marfan syndrome
Circulation. 2008; 117:2802-2813
Crossref
Scopus (148)
PubMed
Google Scholar
271.
Mizuguchi, T. ∙ Collod-Beroud, G. ∙ Akiyama, T. ...
Heterozygous TGFBR2 mutations in Marfan syndrome
Nat Genet. 2004; 36:855-860
Crossref
Scopus (441)
PubMed
Google Scholar
272.
Mátyás, G. ∙ Arnold, E. ∙ Carrel, T. ...
Identification and in silico analyses of novel TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 mutations in Marfan syndrome-related disorders
Hum Mutat. 2006; 27:760-769
Crossref
Scopus (81)
PubMed
Google Scholar
273.
Mizuguchi, T. ∙ Matsumoto, N.
Recent progress in genetics of Marfan syndrome and Marfan-associated disorders
J Hum Genet. 2007; 52:1-12
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
274.
Gautier, M. ∙ Detaint, D. ∙ Fermanian, C. ...
Nomograms for aortic root diameters in children using two-dimensional echocardiography
Am J Cardiol. 2010; 105:888-894
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (80)
PubMed
Google Scholar
275.
Radonic, T. ∙ de Witte, P. ∙ Baars, M.J. ..., COMPARE Study Group
Losartan therapy in adults with Marfan syndrome: study protocol of the multi-centre randomized controlled COMPARE trial
Trials. 2010; 12:11-13
Google Scholar
276.
Gambarin, F.I. ∙ Favalli, V. ∙ Serio, A. ...
Rationale and design of a trial evaluating the effects of losartan vs. nebivolol vs. the association of both on the progression of aortic root dilation in Marfan syndrome with FBN1 gene mutations
J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2009; 10:354-362
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
277.
Rahman, J. ∙ Rahman, F.Z. ∙ Rahman, W. ...
Obstetric and gynecologic complications in women with Marfan syndrome
J Reprod Med. 2003; 48:723-728
PubMed
Google Scholar
278.
Loeys, B.L. ∙ Chen, J. ∙ Neptune, E.R. ...
A syndrome of altered cardiovascular, craniofacial, neurocognitive and skeletal development caused by mutations in TGFBR1 or TGFBR2
Nat Genet. 2005; 37:275-281
Crossref
Scopus (958)
PubMed
Google Scholar
279.
Loeys, B.L. ∙ Schwarze, U. ∙ Holm, T. ...
Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta receptor
N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:788-798
Crossref
Scopus (879)
PubMed
Google Scholar
280.
Williams, J.A. ∙ Loeys, B.L. ∙ Nwakanma, L.U. ...
Early surgical experience with Loeys-Dietz: a new syndrome of aggressive thoracic aortic aneurysm disease
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:S757-S763
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
281.
Hughes, G.C.
Aggressive aortic replacement for Loeys-Dietz syndrome
Tex Heart Inst J. 2011; 38:663-666
PubMed
Google Scholar
282.
Beridze, N. ∙ Frishman, W.H.
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and prevention and treatment of its complications
Cardiol Rev. 2012; 20:4-7
Crossref
Scopus (21)
PubMed
Google Scholar
283.
Ong, K.T. ∙ Perdu, J. ∙ De Backer, J. ...
Effect of celiprolol on prevention of cardiovascular events in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a prospective randomised, open, blinded-endpoints trial
Lancet. 2010; 376:1476-1484
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (143)
PubMed
Google Scholar
284.
Oderich, G.S. ∙ Panneton, J.M. ∙ Bower, T.C. ...
The spectrum, management and clinical outcome of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV: a 30 year experience
J Vasc Surg. 2005; 42:98-106
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
285.
Lum, Y.W. ∙ Brooke, B.S. ∙ Arnaoutakis, G.J. ...
Endovascular procedures in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a review of clinical outcomes and iatrogenic complications
Ann Vasc Surg. 2012; 26:25-33
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
286.
Erez, Y. ∙ Ezra, Y. ∙ Rojansky, N.
Ehlers-Danlos type IV in pregnancy. A case report and a literature review
Fetal Diagn Ther. 2008; 23:7-9
Crossref
Scopus (20)
PubMed
Google Scholar
287.
Stochholm, K. ∙ Juul, S. ∙ Juel, K. ...
Prevalence, incidence, diagnostic delay, and mortality in Turner syndrome
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006; 91:3897-3902
Crossref
Scopus (267)
PubMed
Google Scholar
288.
Carlson, M. ∙ Silberbach, M.
Dissection of the aorta in Turner syndrome: two cases and review of 85 cases in the literature
J Med Genet. 2007; 44:745-749
Crossref
Scopus (118)
PubMed
Google Scholar
289.
Matura, L.A. ∙ Sachdev, V. ∙ Bakalov, V.K. ...
Growth hormone treatment and left ventricular dimensions in Turner syndrome
J Pediatr. 2007; 150:587-591
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
290.
Keramati, A.R. ∙ Sadeghpour, A. ∙ Farahani, M.M. ...
The non-syndromic familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections maps to 15q21 locus
BMC Med Genet. 2010; 11:143
Crossref
Scopus (10)
PubMed
Google Scholar
291.
Tulsyan, N. ∙ Valentin, M.D. ∙ Ombrellino, M. ...
Recurrent aortic angiosarcoma – a case report and review of the literature
Angiology. 2006; 57:123-125
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
292.
Wright, E.P. ∙ Glick, A.D. ∙ Virmani, R. ...
Aortic intimal sarcoma with embolic metastases
Am J Surg Pathol. 1985; 9:890-897
Crossref
Scopus (116)
PubMed
Google Scholar
293.
Sibille, L. ∙ Ilonca, D. ∙ Oziol, E. ...
FDG PET/CT in aortic angiosarcoma
Clin Nucl Med. 2010; 35:134-137
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
294.
Chiche, L. ∙ Mongrédien, B. ∙ Brocheriou, I. ...
Primary tumors of the thoracoabdominal aorta: surgical treatment of 5 patients and review of the literature
Ann Vasc Surg. 2003; 17:354-364
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
PubMed
Google Scholar
295.
Hales, S.L. ∙ Locke, R. ∙ Sandison, A. ...
Aortic angiosarcoma: a rare cause for leaking thoracic aneurysm
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2011; 34:S20-S24
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
296.
Pagni, S. ∙ Trivedi, J. ∙ Ganzel, B.L. ...
Thoracic aortic mobile thrombus: is there a role for early surgical intervention?
Ann Thorac Surg. 2011; 91:1875-1881
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (16)
PubMed
Google Scholar
297.
Avegliano, G. ∙ Evangelista, A. ∙ Elorz, C. ...
Acute peripheral arterial ischaemia and suspected aortic dissection. Usefulness of transesophageal echocardiography in differential diagnosis with aortic thrombosis
Am J Cardiol. 2002; 90:674-677
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
298.
Criado, F. ∙ Wall, P. ∙ Lucas, P. ...
Transesophageal echo-guided endovascular exclusion of thoracic aortic mobile thrombi
J Vasc Surg. 2004; 39:238-245
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (37)
PubMed
Google Scholar
299.
Desai, N.D. ∙ Burtch, K. ∙ Moser, W. ...
Long-term comparison of thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) to OR for the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012; 144:604-609
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
300.
Ayuso, J.R. ∙ de Caralt, T.M. ∙ Pages, M. ...
MRA is useful as a follow up technique after endovascular repair of aortic aneurysms with nitinol endoprostheses
J Magn Reson Imaging. 2004; 20:803-810
Crossref
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
301.
Bruggink, J.L. ∙ Glaudemans, A.W. ∙ Saleem, B.R. ...
Accuracy of FDG-PET-CT in the diagnostic work up of vascular prosthetic graft infection
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2010; 40:348-354
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (0)
PubMed
Google Scholar
302.
Therrien, J. ∙ Thorne, S.A. ∙ Wright, A. ...
Repaired coarctation: a “cost-effective” approach to identify complications in adults
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000; 35:997-1002
Crossref
Scopus (105)
PubMed
Google Scholar
303.
Ralovich, K. ∙ Itu, L. ∙ Mihalef, V. ...
Hemodynamic assessment of pre- and post-operative aortic coarctation from MRI
Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2012; 15:486-493
PubMed
Google Scholar
304.
Parmer, S.S. ∙ Carpenter, J.P. ∙ Stavropoulos, S.W. ...
Endoleaks after endovascular repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms
J Vasc Surg. 2006; 44:447-452
Full Text
Full Text (PDF)
Scopus (119)
PubMed
Google Scholar
Figures (35)
Article metrics

        1,091
        Citations
        662
        Captures
        1
        Mentions
        Plum X logo
        View details opens in a new tab

Related articles (40)

    Editor's Choice – Sex Specific Differences in the Management of Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms: Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis
        Ulug et al.
    European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular SurgeryJuly 29, 2019
    Editor's Choice – Treatment Decisions for Descending Thoracic Aneurysm: Preferences for Thoracic Endovascular Aneurysm Repair or Surveillance in a Discrete Choice Experiment
        Rudarakanchana et al.
    European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular SurgeryMarch 26, 2014
    Editor's Choice – Incidence of Stroke Following Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair for Descending Aortic Aneurysm: A Systematic Review of the Literature with Meta-analysis
        von Allmen et al.
    European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular SurgeryDecember 17, 2016

Show more

    Home
    Access for Developing Countries

Articles & Issues

    Articles In Press
    Current Issue
    List of Issues
    Supplements
    EJVES Extra

Collections

    Editor's Choice Articles
    Chinese Translated Abstracts
    Spanish Translated Abstracts

For Authors

    About Open Access
    Author Information
    Permissions
    Reporting Guidelines
    Researcher Academy
    Submit a Manuscript

Journal Info

    About Open Access
    About the Journal
    Activate Online Access
    Career Opportunities
    Contact Information
    Editorial Board
    Info for Advertisers
    Pricing
    Reprints
    New Content Alerts
    Guidelines
    Subscribe
    ESVS

More Periodicals

    Find a Periodical
    Go to Product Catalog

The content on this site is intended for healthcare professionals.

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. To update your cookie settings, please visit the
for this site.
All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors.
All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

    Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions   Accessibility   Help & Contact 


RELX

